Milk teeth are very important milestone in child's life. But do we all know that why they are extremely important and what functions do they play in child's life, in child's development? Here we have a master of pediatric dentist, Dr. Himali. She will explain us and guide us through the entire process of oral hygiene and care in infants and kids. Please note these all the tips are applicable from a newborn baby till your child is 6 years old Because that's the most important part of child's developmental years Let's get started Okay, hello everyone So now let's talk about milk teeth What are milk teeth and why are they important? So the first and foremost, milk teeth They are also known as deciduous teeth, primary teeth These are the commonly heard terms that are from the doctors, dentists or even from your relatives They are also known as pearly whites. Now let's dive into understanding why are milk teeth important? Are they really important? Because we have been hearing this since ages. Like milk teeth they will as it is fall off. Why are you taking care of them? Let them be the way they are. Yeah. So let's understand the importance of milk teeth. So the first and foremost importance of milk teeth is chewing. So when your kid or your child or your baby is still 6 years. the only teeth that are present in the mouth are the milk teeth so maximum chewing maximum biting is happening by the milk teeth now consider your child is not having milk teeth that are in healthy condition that is they are carious they are having big big holes or anything like that what will happen your child will start eating different food with different consistencies once your child was eating hard now your child will switch to food that is a little semi-solid or like mashy food something in which he does not have to chew, directly will gulp food or your child will start pouching food everywhere. Is that healthy for your child? Not at all. We need to understand one thing that brain development is happening maximum until the age of six years. So this is the time when your child needs to bite, needs maximum nutrition or probably if you're giving some added nutrition even that is needed. So if it's there and if we cannot take care of our milk teeth, so in turn we are harming the development of our child. Then coming to the next thing, milk teeth are here and we have the permanent teeth that are sitting behind the milk teeth. So these milk teeth help the permanent teeth or guide them to come in that position. You might have noticed that a milk tooth is there and right in that position a permanent tooth comes. So if the milk tooth is not there or if the milk tooth is removed early or it's very carious, in such cases what happens is that the permanent teeth might get confused inside. It might come more towards the tongue or it might come more towards the cheek. Or in some cases, the permanent teeth might not erupt. It might just be locked inside the jaw. We do not want that, right? Coming to the next most important thing of milk teeth that it does. And we don't even know it does it very silently. Did you know that speech is something that is affected by teeth? We never thought about it. Now come on, Let's tell these some words or some letters with me. Tell V. V. P. F. Tell L. L. Th. Th. Now imagine telling these letters without the teeth. Th. I can't say Th. V. We will never tell V. V. V. Now tell L. It doesn't sound. L. L without your teeth. L. L. L. So this is basically you need your front teeth for proper speech. If you do not have them, what will happen? your child will start lisping or your child will start stammering all of which will in turn affect your child's self-esteem in public plus speech development will be delayed which is another problem that you will face now coming to the next thing that a milk tooth can do so milk tooth even plays a very important role in the aesthetics of your child so now we all know that one smile can win millions of hearts but what if that smile is only not nice what if the smile is black it's crooked or what if the teeth are only not there and then when your smile child smiles you know there is a little social pressure in children's as well kids around will start teasing your kid and in turn he will have very low self-esteem it's really necessary to understand and not only kids i'm sure even family members do tease the kid who does not have teeth so we take it in a very fun way but for kids who have peer pressure around we do not take it in a fun way so it's always advised to have a healthy smile and if not get it restored so that your child's speech as well as aesthetics is taken into concern and development definitely all of us as a parents we really want to understand that they are important so we have to take care of this so all of you we both together are not going to confuse you we are going to in fact lead you step-by-step guide that how do you actually do it so all of you let's see you all in the next segment infant oral care so what do we do and how do we do with respect to infants about their oral care let's get started