Now we come to our newborn babies, infant oral care. Exactly what it is, when does it start, what benefits it is going to do to my baby. Because one of the most important question that all of us have, my baby does not have teeth. Then why there is oral care? Because my baby is only breast feeding, bottle feeding or formula feeding. what is there to actually get harm inside the mouth let's understand it from an expert yes so hello everyone let's talk about infant oral care so basically what is infant oral care we need to understand so the procedure of taking care of your child's gums as well as the tongue from birth until your child's first tooth erupts is called as infant oral care now this involves taking care of the gums and the tongue. Now when should we do infant oral care or when should we start cleaning all these things? So basically it's advised right from the birth that is from the day your kid is born till the first tooth erupts and even after two to three teeths have erupted the behind gums we have to take care of it. Now can the new mothers take care of the child so early? The answer is not absolutely no, but yeah, definitely some mothers are not that trained or yet have not accustomed to their child's body language. It becomes extra demanding sometimes. So in such cases, say you can give your kid and your bonding another 10-15 days or a month or so, but then after that, it should be in you that you start this habit. You start cleaning your child's gum pad as well as the tongue so that the milk or the formula fed that your child has had is not pulled inside the mouth. Now I'm talking about so much that we have to, we have to, we have to. But why do we have to do it? Is it really necessary? Now let's get into that. So what happens when you breastfeed your child? After you breastfeed your child, there's a lot of milk deposits that is very sticky and it's stuck onto the tooth surface. And if the tooth is not present, it's stuck onto the gums, it's stuck onto the tongue, as well as the cheeks. Now if you do not clean it, these milk particles will be there for a very long time and there will be bacteria that harbour in it and these bacteria will eventually colonize and then later it will lead to dental caries. So you are putting yourself through the procedure that in later stages your child might have dental caries. Might as well take care now. Another important thing, it's really important to understand that when there is pool of milk inside the mouth. This milk harbors bacteria which may lead to middle ear infection. Many times bacha aise haath lagata hai, your kid is just putting hand here, you don't know why. They rub it and cry. Yeah, so you don't know why. Middle ear infection can be, can be cause of milk pooling in the mouth. So if you clean the milk, this will not happen. Another thing, kaafi bachho mein agar kaafi dino tak, that is for a very long time if not cleanse the mouth. You can see white patches. These white patches are nothing but oral thrush. Oral thrush is basically a kind of a fungal infection in which the fungus starts growing onto the gums surface or it starts growing onto the cheeks or even the tongue. It's not that it's seen only in child's, it can be seen even in adults. If cleanliness is not maintained, there are chances that there is fungal infection seen. For that matter, you keep a bread piece anywhere for three days what will happen oh it starts smelling bad and the fungus starts growing you can see black fungal growth so in the similar manner in the oral cavity you can see white color oral thrush but dr himalaya saliva is enough to self clean mouth right so basically you need to understand when you take a bottle of water now take a bottle of milk bottle of water is there and rinse it and throw it away the water bottle will be entirely clean because it is water water is not sticky now consider you have a bottle of milk now clean it with water just put water in it shake it and see is the water bottle clean yes now the milk bottle will be better if i've shaken it water shake it and clean but is it entirely clean or yet you have to put a brush and clean it i have to put a brush and clean it so it's the same in the oral cavity even after your kid has had feeding and after that you give a little bit water the major parts of it will go away definitely but what about the minor particles of the milk that are stuck the sticky parts the sticky things that is stuck to the gums how will that be cleaned that's important and if child is under six months we are not even giving water yeah basic saliva that is always recommended that you take that extra time out and develop a routine for your child and any time this is a known fact that child or any baby thrives for a routine so if you create a routine for your child the child will enjoy the procedure so just create a routine for your child so that you can clean the gum pads and then eventually it will develop a sensation in your child's mouth and this sensation will help them accept a toothbrush later so that tells us the importance of why oral care is important now let's understand how do we do it exactly how do we hold the baby how we can ensure that my baby and i both are very comfortable with the process now let's talk about the different tools that are are required in infant rural care. So the first thing that is required as a muslin cloth also called as a washcloth. You'll have a mul cloth or a muslin cloth. Second that can be used is a gauze piece. This is a sterilized gauze piece that you get in any medical store. And the third is a finger brush. This is again something that you'll get in any store. This is a silicon finger brush. You have to take a finger brush which is BPA free. Now let's get into the first segment of how to clean your child's cavity that is the gums as well as the tongue with a washcloth. You have to wrap it around your finger in this way, dip your finger in lukewarm water. So take a bowl, have lukewarm water in it, dip your finger in it, very gently open your child's mouth and clean the gum pads. Clean the gum pads up, down, in, out as well as clean the tongue and gums. So when it's a washcloth that the advantage of this is that it can be reused. You can clean it, wash it, dry it and reuse it. Now in the similar manner a gauze piece is to be used, it is to be wrapped around the finger and it can be used. But with a gauze piece, you cannot reuse it because it has fine threads in it. So if you reuse it, there are chances that your child might just gulp any of it. Now coming to till when do we use the gauze piece or the washcloth. So till your child is approximately from birth to around 3 months or 4 months of age, it's always advised to use a gauze piece or a washcloth. So because at this time yet there is development happening in the oral cavity and the oral cavity is very small. So with a finger brush, there is added projections here plus here. It's not necessary that your child will be acceptable to this at an early age of 3 months. So at that time, you can use a gauze piece or a cloth in which it's just the finger thickness. So this can be used during that age. Now your child is approximately four months, five months, a little bigger. At such times, what is to be done? Or let's say one tooth has come, so what is to be done? So at these times, it's very essential to switch to a finger brush or a silicone brush. These silicone brushes come in this or even you have handheld finger brushes or silicone brushes. So the best thing about this is they fit onto your finger and you can insert it your child's mouth and clean the gum pads with these. At the same time in the circular motion you can put a deep pressure massage on the gums of your child because at the same time teeth are also erupting so the child is going through teething as well so these finger brushes can act as a soothing mechanism for your child. While cleaning your child's gum pads with a finger brush you have to dip the finger brush in the bowl of water so that whatever milk residues are on it they are clean in the water now let's understand the different positions in which you can hold your child so that brushing is very comfortable these are some of the positions in which you can comfortably clean your child's oral cavity the first one is the cradle position and the second being in this way you can hold your child very close to yourself the third in which you can seat your child very comfortably and look into the oral cavity and clean their oral cavity now before For cleaning, tap gently beneath their lips or even you can tap onto their cheeks. This will create a reflex reaction in which your child will open their mouth for breastfeeding. When your child does open your mouth, insert your finger into your child's mouth for cleaning their gums as well as their tongue. So before doing that, wrap a gauze cloth or a washcloth on your finger and then dip it into the water and after that clean your child's gums upper as well as the lower gum pads. While doing this you have to see that your child is comfortably seated. Now when cleaning your child's tongue take a different place of the same gauze cloth or the same wash cloth and clean the tongue. Do not use the same place because this will transfer the bacteria from the tongue to the gums. Now while cleaning you have to observe that you clean the upper as well as the lower gum pads from inside as well as from outside. Then in between you have to dip your finger in the bowl of water so that all the residual milk is seen in the bowl of water and it is not there inside your child's mouth. The entire procedure has to be done with extremely love and care and it has to be extremely gentle. Thank you.