important part of oral care is toothbrush and toothpaste it's time to understand how do we select right toothbrush for our child we have been hearing about it we have been seeing it a lot on television and ads are very very attractive see one thing is that my baby goes into the shop and start asking for i want this i want this i want this and second thing we as a parent don't know which one do i pick but at the same time we as a parents have to know when do we start using toothbrush and toothpaste and which kind of toothbrush and toothpaste we have to start using at what age so now definitely in the market there is a lot of variety of toothpaste toothbrush now basically you need to understand that when to start brushing so the time from the time the first tooth erupts in your child's mouth you have to start using a toothbrush as well as a toothpaste initially recommended can be these silicon toothbrushes but later on we have to switch to these brushes in which there is nylon brushes and toothpaste there is no argument in it toothpaste has to be used from the time the first tooth erupts so definitely there is a lot of variety in the toothbrushes available in the market. So let's start from as your child is born. So now we already know that infant oral care, what to do, how to do, when to do. That is we take a gauze piece and or we take a washcloth. Now the next thing is now your child has two or four teeth that is front two or four teeth have started coming. Now what to do? So yet you can continue using a silicone toothbrush. So this is a finger brush. It seats very easily onto your finger and these silicon bristles they can help in cleaning the teeth now do we use a toothpaste yes the answer is absolutely yes we have to use a toothpaste during this time so these toothbrushes are to be used when your child has two four teeth and in the initial stages okay what is the next type of toothbrush that is available in the market so talking about it it's a manual and the most commonly used toothbrush so what is basically manual it's a toothbrush with which you brush with your own hands. That's called as manual. So now coming to the variety of manual toothbrush, you get many in the markets, 2 plus, 3 plus, 5 plus, 6 plus. So which to be used, when to be used, things to understand before buying one thing. So the first thing you have to check is the head of the toothbrush. So what comes in the head of the toothbrush is the size of the head. The size of the head should be small so that it can easily get into your child's mouth and your child should not feel choky or should not feel pukish while entering into his mouth. Now the next after this as the age advances you have to look for a little bigger head that is when your child is around six to seven years of age. Now the next thing that is to be focused upon how to choose a toothbrush is the bristles. So the various bristles available in the market are hard, medium, soft, ultra soft, extra soft. Which one do you need? Soft, good enough, extra soft, good enough. medium or hard is not recommended for your child so soft bristle as well as ultra soft or extra soft bristles now where do you where can you understand that it's soft not soft so when you buy a toothbrush on the packet itself it's mentioned that what is the kind of the tooth bristle that is present on the toothbrush so that will guide you right now the next thing that is to be understood is the grip of the toothbrush that is a grip so when your child is approximately three years age or say four years age grip is not that a major thing reason being it is advised that the parents should be brushing their teeth so at that time you can take a smaller handle so that it's easy for you to hold as well as to brush your child's teeth but as your child's age advances that is around six to eight years your child will start brushing his own teeth so during five to six years you can take a toothbrush that has a bigger grip that is a thicker grip toothbrush and now as the child advances as the age advances your child can hold a pencil so now you have to switch to a thinner grip that is a grip which is thin can you compare the grips so this grip is usually needed for a child who is a little younger whereas this is a grip that can be for a child who is a little older this can even be used up to eight years of age now after all of this you switch to an adult toothbrush preferably when your child has the permanent molars erupting and can bear a adult toothbrush in their mouth without having a puking sensation, you can switch to it. So around 8, 9 or approximately 10 years, by 10 years, you have to switch to an adult toothbrush. Okay, so these are all the manual toothbrushes. Now let's talk about electric toothbrush. This is another toothbrush that is available in the market and very, very, very commonly kids do want this because it's a fun game for them. So is electric toothbrush advised for each and every of you? No, the answer is absolutely no. In kids who have some manual dexterity problem or they are special needs children in them definitely this toothbrush or a toothbrush that works by electric power is the best one. But because in them the manual dexterity is not there and the toothbrush will do maximum work that is you just have to take the toothbrush to the tooth and the work is done by the toothbrush. Now can you introduce it to your child? Definitely, but how? It can be introduced as a fun game to your child in which the child can just play along with the electric toothbrush as well as do the brushing with this. It's not that it's bad, it's just that it can be a little harmful for your child if your child keeps playing for it with a long time and he can injure his gums. So to be used with a lot of caution. So these are the common toothbrushes that that are available in market. Now let's talk about one more toothbrush that is right now coming in the market for like newborn babies till approximately three years of age. It's seen very commonly and there are a lot of advertisements about it. That is called as a U-shaped brush. Is a U-shaped brush efficient and good for my child? The answer is no. The U-shaped brush has silicon bristles. Now it's very essential to understand that silicon bristles do not clean the tooth surface. They help to scrub, they help just to rub the tooth surface but they will not clean the sticky things on your tooth. So a silicon toothbrush is not what is indicated for your child. Definitely it can be introduced as a play game for your child. Something that he can play with plus you can brush with a manual toothbrush but the cleaning efficiency of this silicon brushes is not good that is the reason we switch from a finger brush to a nylon toothbrush a nylon toothbrush has many bristles and tufted bristles so they help to clean the they help to clean all all the dirt that is there stuck on to the tooth very efficiently so this u-shaped brush is not recommended for good oral hygiene it It can definitely be introduced as a plaything for your child. And the second thing with a U shaped arch is, is your child's U shaped arch, that is the teeth arch, what we call the jawline or the jaw arch, is it of the same shape? Definitely not. So what will happen, you will end up hurting your child or you will not do an efficient cleaning. This might not reach the behind teeth or if it's too big, your child might not like the sensation. So the best thing is to avoid it for a daily cleaning. Thank you. Thank you.