So this basically makes me understand as a mother what is silicon bristles what are the nylon bristles why there is a shift needed and how do we make that shift i have a very important question over here dr himali now it comes to toothpaste see toothbrushes you explain that grip you should see the grip you should see the head size you should see the bristles and you should consider the age of child but at the same time do we have any specifications with respect to the toothpaste Before we go ahead, let me tell you, I see variety of toothpaste. So there are few with crystals, there are few with herbs, there are few like gel, there are few like paste. It's confusing for my child and for me as well. So please do guide. Okay, so let's talk about toothpaste. Is toothpaste important? Definitely yes. Should I use a toothpaste? Definitely yes. Now coming to what toothpaste to buy for my child So the most important component to be considered in a toothpaste is fluoride So basically Yes I know it should be fluoride free No it should not be fluoride free So it should have fluoride So the myth that is going on around is that the toothpaste should be fluoride free But ideally according to the AAPD approved guidelines Fluoride is the most essential component of the toothpaste for a child to help them cavity protection. So, how much fluoride? 1000 ppm of fluoride, that is what is indicated in a toothpaste for your child. Every child needs to have 1000 ppm of fluoride. So, now is the fluoride only thing that we look into it? I don't know. Have you ever checked a toothpaste? Actually, that's what made me confused. I'm thinking, do we actually get kids toothpaste who have got 1000 ppm of fluoride? Okay, so the answer is no, not in India. Abroad, you do get a toothpaste that have 1000 ppm of fluoride. But in India, the kids toothpaste have maximum 500 ppm of fluoride. So for your kids, you have to use an adult toothpaste that has 1000 ppm of fluoride, much needed. From the age first tooth have come. Erupted. Yes. Okay, that makes a huge sense. So how do we actually choose? So one thing is about the component. Second about the texture or anything. So now the first component that we looked into was fluoride. Now the second component is that is after consulting your dentist or doctor, if your child has a lot of caries, then the next component to be considered in the toothpaste is xylitol. It is a kind of a sugar but it helps in caries protection. So some toothpastes do have xylitol but that is again after consulting your doctor, then you look into it that do you need a xylitol toothpaste. Now the next thing to be considered is that have you seen that there are different consistencies of toothpaste some are gel based some are cream based. So this is basically cause of a component that is an abrasive inside the toothbrush toothpaste. So what is an abrasive? So the action that is if you have a tooth and the rubbing action that is caused or let's see this is our tooth and the rubbing or the rubbing action that we cause and the cleaning that happens is cause of the abrasive. So there are two types of abrasive. One is a silica abrasive which can be in an irregular form. So if silica abrasives are in an irregular form that are usually present in gels, they are more abrasive on your tooth. They will erode your tooth more. But if you have a cream based toothpaste, it usually has calcium carbonate which is a little less abrasive for your tooth. So it's advised to use a calcium carbonate compared to a gel based or silica based toothpaste. So cream-based is something that we have to select for the test? Yes, preferably cream-based and then the next thing that is to be looked into in a toothpaste is a preservative. Everything that you buy from the market definitely has a preservative. Now the various preservatives such as methylparabene, ethylparabene are a complete no for your child. So if you're looking into the preservatives, please see if there is sodium benzoate in it that is an acceptable FDA approved preservative for the toothpaste so if that is present you can take the toothpaste otherwise it is advised not to take those toothpastes oh okay next very important question that comes to me that um when do i take toothpaste should i be using it like full coverage of the toothbrush as it's shown in the tv serials so now coming to the quantity of the toothpaste So when your child is up till 3 years of age, either your child is using a finger brush or a normal brush, it is advised to use a rice grain of toothpaste. That is your child will use a finger brush when your child is say 8 months, 9 months and when the teeth start erupting you switch to a brush like this and now you brush with toothbrush as well as toothpaste but the quantity of the toothpaste is only like a rice grain. So after taking the toothpaste, you spread or you smear, you make a smear layer of the toothpaste. I made it wet. You make it wet. You put a little bit of toothpaste and you make a smear layer and then you brush your child's teeth. Now coming to a child who is approximately, say from three years to six years of age, you have to take a pea size, that is a pea size blob of toothpaste on the brush and then brush. Similarly, you have to spread or make a smear layer along with that. Along with that, when your child is around 8 to 10 years, you can take the size of at least a little big blob, but not the entire length. It is not recommended and that much toothpaste or that much fluoride is not indicated. I was supposed to tell you more fluoride, more protection. So, exactly what are the truths and myths around having fluoride actually? So, let's dive into it. Now, let's understand about fluoride. There is a lot of myths about fluoride that fluoride leads to toxicity, fluoride may lead to seizures. But the amount of fluoride that is recommended in the toothpaste, along with that the quantity of toothpaste that is recommended according to the age wise, very, very, very minute amount of fluoride goes into your child's mouth. And all of it is ideally to be removed or to be spitted out. Now coming to fluoride, is it naturally present? Absolutely. You're eating spinach, you're eating so many green leafy vegetables that already have fluoride in it. Wow! Along with that, it is recommended by the government that the water that we drink has to be fluoridated. So each and every one of us is already having fluoride. So the added fluoride is not causing any harm. Now, unless and until there are some parents who come with the thing that, no, my daughter or my son are putting so much Colgate or so much Close Up or for that matter, my child likes the taste of the toothpaste and he is having it entirely. He's eating it. So then at such times, definitely that's a harm. harm that's why a quantity that is the rice grain and the pea size it's very important now the second thing how does fluoride work did you ever think i didn't thought about fluoride only so i'm not i've not even crossed my first tip so second says i'm not reached but how does it work because i've heard this term called as fluoride toothpaste for us as an adults for kids is completely new thing for me so let's understand on this small teeth how actually fluoride is working so now you need to understand that the outer layer of the tooth in each one of us the reason why our teeth look white is the enamel of the tooth so the outer layer of the tooth is enamel which is white and it is made up of loosely attached crystals which is called as hydroxyapatite crystals so now these are hydroxy apatite crystals together form the enamel now when you're brushing and when there is fluoride this fluoride goes and attracts into these hydroxyapatite wherever there are spaces and it forms another component which is called as fluorhydroxyapatite so now this fluorhydroxyapatite is very tightly packed and it does not have spaces so this what will it do it helps to strengthen the enamel and makes it more stronger and protects the enamel against future caries damage so it's always advised to have fluoride so that you can give some preventive care to your child so it's prevention its beauty its strength and its protection so in case some of the tooth has got the caries still your other tooth can be protected if there's a good fluoride presence in the toothpaste as well along with that you need to understand one more thing that if your child is in the stage of initial caries lesion that is just these gums lines these gum lines has started having initial caries lesion it's advisable to visit a dentist and proper medicated fluoride can even reverse these lesions what do you mean by lesions so anywhere where there is caries that is kid yeah in hindi you will call it kid lagna and in english you will very commonly call it caries or cavitation but will it be like black no there is a thin white line along the gums if that is seen in your child that is absolutely reversible by taking good oral care plus proper supplementations of fluoride given by the dentist will help to reverse it can i ask you one more question with respect to the color changes in child's teeth at this age is this because of toothpaste is this because of vitamin d or an iron supplementation given by doctor or is this actually because of caries so there are multiple reasons of tooth color changes one can be of lack of oral hygiene there are certain bacteria in the oral cavity these are called as chromogenic bacteria some give a black discoloration some give an orange discoloration some give a green discoloration this can be one reason so if you do not take good care of your child's teeth there can be certain discoloration one more reason can be if your child is really onto iron supplementations iron supplementations also causes a lot of discoloration for your child. There are other tips and tricks and methods how to reduce that. But that's for some other day. Now, let's get into the other thing that is caries really causing it? Definitely is. So there are stages of caries or cavitation that is seen in your child's mouth. Initially, it will just be seen as a white line. Later, it will progress to a brown, dark brown, yellow to dark brown spots. And later on, in the later stages, there will be huge cavitations seen or a tooth, it will be seen like it's eaten by someone. We'll be seeing a teeth with missing teeth parts. That is called as tooth cavitation. Oh, so any kind of a color changes, we need to go and visit dentist, preferably a pediatric dentist. So that's what he suggested. Thank you so much, Dr. Imali for this particular segment. See you all in next segment where we go step by step guide about how do we use the technique, the positions of brushing your child's teeth. Age-wise, guys, let's look.