Once we have understood essentials of buying anything for our child, I've understood how do we select a toothbrush, how do we select a toothpaste, now it comes how do we actually use it because technique is equally important when we have a raw material we must know how do we use it wisely for our child. So let's understand technique guide age-wise. Okay so now let's start. Assume that your child is around three months, six months we've already spoken we will be just using a washcloth or we'll be using a gauze piece and cleaning your child's mouth and then later on we'll be switching to a finger brush. So till how long do we use a finger brush? So now we talk about finger brushes. So we already know how to select a finger brush from where to buy it you'll get it in any any markets one thing that you have to note about the finger brush that it should be a government approved that is fda approvals as well as you need to have a bpa free toothbrushes and each time you use a finger brush it should be sterilized clenched and then used in your child's mouth now how to use it when to use it let's get to that now if your child has had anterior two teeth lower two teeth upper two teeth or at least four teeth At such times, you switch to a finger brush and on the finger brush, you apply toothpaste that is rice grain quantity. You use the toothbrush in this format. Take the brush and brush the teeth. Each and every tooth should be brushed for at least 5 to 10 seconds along with the toothpaste and the toothbrush. Do not brush onto the gums. Brush only on the teeth 5 to 10 seconds each tooth in a circular manner. So in this form you will brush your child's tooth. Okay, now this is the portion when you are brushing the teeth. Along with that, with the same finger brush, you do some massage to the behind gum portion because teeth will be erupting there. This is the way you clean the gums. Now let's get on to we know toothbrush, toothpaste, but can your child spit? Definitely not. Hardly some kids learn to spit by the age of one and a half years or say two years of age. So at such times what is to be done? So what do you do? You take a gauze cloth or you take a wash cloth and dip it in water and very nicely clean the entire oral cavity after brushing so that all the excess of toothpaste is removed and your child is good. Not ingesting a lot of fluoride so your child has good health as well. So now this is with the silicon toothbrush along with a toothpaste. This is up to the age of 1.5 years of age. Now considering your child's age is around 1.5 to 2.5 to 3 years of age. There are a lot of variety of toothbrushes. We've already spoken of how to transit from a smaller head to a bigger head, to a smaller grip, to a bigger grip, to another toothbrush which is thin, slender. During 3 years of age, this is not needed, this is not needed, this is not needed. Till 3 years of age, you can use these 2 toothbrushes. two toothbrushes. Now the amount of the toothpaste again till three years just rise grain of toothpaste. So by three years of age it is really important to start using a tongue cleaner for your child. This will help to clean the tongue as well as maximum bacteria harbors onto the tongue. So it will clean the tongue very nicely. Now there are different positions as well as techniques for brushing your child's teeth till three years of age. Let's get into the techniques. So the only technique that is used is circular motion. Make big circles, make big circles, encourage your child to make big circles and then gently, gently reach the tooth and again clean the teeth in a circular manner. This is the way you clean the front as well as the back teeth of your child. At this point, basically your child has six to ten teeth in his or her mouth. So it's very easy to clean the teeth in a circular motion. At this time, if your child is allowing, you can even do some rubbing or scrubbing like this and pull in the downward direction but this is only if your child is allowing do not force your child because brushing is something that your child has to continue for his entire life so if anything is forced onto the child it becomes a punishment so do not make it a punishment so how much time do we do the circular motion so we have a front say uh your child has 10 teeth he'll have some of the front teeth as well as some back teeth So each teeth at least for 10 to 15 seconds and you rotate rotate rotate rotate rotate and wherever there are no teeth you can just rotate it. These bristles are not hard they will not hurt your child you can just rotate it in turn it will clean the entire oral cavity and rest at the end clean the tongue. Okay so that gives an amazing guide till age three. Now your child is age three plus what kind of a technique they need to use so when your child is age three plus it is really important to switch to a toothbrush which is a little bigger head okay so this is approximately three years so say six years of age a little bigger head now at this time your child has complete 20 set of teeth what do you do similar we already know the tooth paste that we take is approximately a pea-sized toothpaste so the toothpaste is pea size can my brush can my child spit yeah now basically maximum child starts spitting so whatever toothpaste is there in the mouth the child starts to spit say if your child is four years of age and as yet your child has not learned spitting you can yet use toothpaste that is a little less than a pea size there is no issue in it but do not use excess of toothpaste dr himali sometimes my child knows spitting but i I am confused as a mother, is my child spitting everything out or not? Then what do I do? So in a similar way, when your child is really young and you know that spitting has not been established as a routine for him, it's always advisable to take a cloth and clean the entire cavity so that you are assured that there is no residual toothpaste left in your child's mouth. OK, so we can just continue with the basic practice. Yes, basic practices. Now coming to how do you clean your child's tooth at this age. So now coming to how to brush your child's teeth when the entire set that is 20 teeth have been erupted. We have to divide the entire oral cavity into 6 sections. We have 2 front sections and 4 behind sections. So in this the front section when brushing the front section you have to lift the lip up and brush the teeth. And while brushing the behind section you have to lift the lip up that is the lip as well as the cheek up and brush the teeth. So this will help you see the teeth while brushing as well as help in proper cleaning of the teeth. Now what are the different strokes that are to be used? So for the front teeth, you have to clean the front teeth as well as from behind. And for the behind teeth, you have to clean the front, the back, the top as well as the cross brushing is required. Now when you are brushing your child's lower teeth, you have to lift the lip down and brush these teeth. So it's really important to lift the lip and to see the teeth while brushing. So it becomes very comfortable for you as well as the child for brushing. Thank you.