Hi Doctor! So finally how do I know the ways by which I can make this entire activity? Because you are telling till the day you are alive brushing is going to be there. But how do I ensure that it becomes a fun activity for my child? Not like punishment, mama is screaming, bacha dekh raha hai, aada chhod raha hai, aada thuk gheet raha hai, pata nahi kya kya karta hai. So okay. So as we all know, internet has a lot of knowledge, a lot of knowledge about different ways, techniques, methods. I will be sharing about a few methods right now. But again, it is individual that what suits your child best. Now let's talk about the first method. That is, this is a tried and tested method and it basically maximum works for all the children. That is, you have to become a role model for your own child. Now what does that mean? anyone in the house who is brushing that is anyone whom your child will look up to in the house and if that person is brushing and making brushing like a daily routine boring activity and for your child it will be like oh my god I have to brush oh my god I have to brush again why I have to brush every day why I have to brush every day but if you make brushing as a fun activity for everyone in the house or for that matter you your husband and the child all together if If you are making it a fun activity, then your child will look forward to it. Every morning your child will look forward to brushing. Oh yeah, it's brushing time. Even mama, papa are doing, even I am doing. So make it a fun activity and don't use the words like, Bachcha, you have to brush today. You have to brush before going to school. Or at night you have to brush and sleep. When this word have to comes, it automatically triggers and becomes a punishment for your child. That's true. So other than using the words have to, you have to use something like bacha chalo, let's go and both brush our teeth. Let's clean all the dirty things from our mouth. Let's get healthy together. If you use these things, your child will be like, okay, we both are doing it. It is something fun and something that is unbiased. We have to do it. It is a routine. But don't use the word have to. Without using the word, let it be have to in his life. This is one thing. The second thing that you can do with your child is you can go on a shopping spree. Who doesn't like shopping? Even your little ones love shopping. So you can go to some supermarket or for that matter, even your nearest medical store and go with your child and help him to select various toothbrushes of his own choice. Child don't select brush. They will be selecting two, three minimum. That is fine. Let your child select two or three brushes. So that will in turn help you to give your child choices every day. Like if you have two brushes, you have to ask your child which colour do you want? Or do you want to brush with the blue one today? Do you want to brush with the green one today? Do you want to brush with the yellow one today? Or for that matter you can go and buy his own favourite colour, favourite cartoon character on the toothbrush. And then give choices to your child every day that which one you want to brush with. I think a simple investment that can make child look forward to the brush. Definitely. It's a very small investment. But with this, what will happen? Your toddlers, when they are growing, there is a phase where they want to take authority for things. So it's up to you about what authority do you allow them? Do you allow them the authority that do you want to brush or no? No, this is not the authority. The authority can be which tooth brush do you want? The authority can be which color toothpaste do you want? But the authority cannot be do you want to brush or no so this is the way you can inculcate your child and if it's a brush that he has chosen for himself he will love brushing with you for her to brush it okay by the way one of the thing that i would like to add dr himali that in my house what worked is brushing with non-dominant hand so sometimes we do it like a game so everybody in the house so my husband is lefty rest all of us are right okay so all those righty will brush with left hand and we have a counting so we properly have to say if one side we start we have to do 20 then 20 then 20 then 20 then 20 and then we go reverse 20 20 then upper stroke and then inside like that we do it's 20 20 20 20. it's the right thing to brush with it can be as a game introduced to your child definitely with this your child will start accepting brushing but once your child has done brushing with the dominant hand for one minute you have to rub your hand inside his oral cavity and brush once clean so that you're rest assured that it's everything fine at least in six to seven years i think they need our help yes once they're eight nine so we can brush on their own definitely and they really enjoy they're able to see there's little white left okay mama let me clean it properly that's very nice so now let's let's look into the other ways what can be the other fun ways that is One is that you can sit with your child and see some YouTube videos or some music on brushing and by that you can help your child understand that yeah brushing is important it helps to clean all or kill all the germs it helps fighting some rhymes probably up down down something there are some brushing rhymes that can be used or some particular cartoon characters if they are favorite there are some cartoon characters or some cartoons that do show brushing and appointment into the dentist and all of this so that can be that can also help your child nice okay all of you are one of the ad that i saw even that can help when she says about cartoon characters that doremon is brushing its own teeth and then he shows the teeth and there is a star sparkle so when that was so cute my daughter sometimes asked me mama why i'm not seeing the sparkle i said no but you you just brush that's an effect that advertisement company has given but these things are definitely very very effective with respect to child other things other things can be that you can incentivize your child that is giving small incentives you should never chocolates never so you should just understand that your child if you introduce more of chocolates and sugars as incentives your child will love them as incentives but there are small things that you can give and you will see wonderful reactions of your child that just a small star or a smiley or a sticker or you can just tell good job or something like once a while in a month you can just click a photo like good job done today and you can just paste it somewhere in your house these small incentives will really encourage your child to brush every day awesome can i share one more fun idea definitely okay this is not my idea on instagram i've seen somebody doing it in their room they had a wall and in that wall they had written brushing tip kind of calendar like who brushed the teeth at the night who have brushed it in the morning who have lifted their plate after their meal so good habits that you wish to inculcate and everybody have to give starts to themselves when they are not done and they give a sad smiley the days they have missed it in the way that it can be like a healthy competition or something between siblings or or between the parents and the child. And this is the way child learns the importance of daily habits that is needed and they are inculcated in the child in the form of a game. So you can try it out something like this. Ideally being a medical and working into the field with kids, any habit to be developed, you have to continue it at least for 20 to 30 days. Habits take time to get developed, but once they're developed, they will remain with them. Okay, so thank you so much. Thank you, Dr. Himali. next segment will be the last segment where we'll be talking about few of the other aids which are available in market like tongue cleaners mouthwash dental floss let's understand realities of all of these things in next segment see you all