Dr. how do I teach my child to spit? Okay, so spitting is, it will ideally, naturally it will start later in life. But now that we've known the importance of brushing, it's definitely good that if your child learns spitting early in the life. So there can be some ways that you can help your child spitting. That is one is, you use a toothpaste that is not tasty. So your child ends up spitting it out. Second can be that in the sink or the basin, where we have the sink, you just tell your child that it is like a football net and your child has to aim for it. That's nice. Two. So this can be a fun game for your child that I have to aim there and whatever is in my mouth should fall there. So it can be a small game. But with this, your child will learn spitting. The second thing can be telling the number two. So when you tell 2 Look down and tell 2 2 2 So you can tell that Or for that matter you can write the number 2 And keep it on the mirror of the basin Or somewhere where your child can see it And continuously repeat telling 2 2 It's fun Let's try it out tomorrow morning Definitely So that's nice Doctor You've already explained about if child doesn't spit That's absolutely okay You have to clean it But is it so that my child have to rinse or spit at least for 2 minutes, at least for 1 minute? The way you spoke about brushing. So how many times the gargling or the rinsing have to happen? Perfect. So now let's talk about this as well. So when after brushing, we know that we have to brush 2 times a day for 2 minutes. That is upper, lower teeth and the tongue. After all of this is done, how do you rinse? Do you take a full glass of water and rinse away everything that is there in the mouth? The answer is no. Do you take half glass? the answer is no then how much do you take the ideal requirement after brushing is just one sip of water one big sip of water gargle very nicely like this one big sip of water gargle very nicely like this and rinse it off and throw it off spit it off so that what will happen all the excess toothpaste is out what is left inside is the residual toothpaste that reacts with the tooth and the fluoride that will react with the tooth and form our fluorhydroxyapatite. So this is what is needed. But if you take an entire glass of water, everything will be rinsed out. So that is not recommended. Just one big sip of water, rinse and spit it out. And after brushing for half an hour, do not eat or drink anything. Let there be the reaction happening in your child's mouth. So this will help him in a long duration. Wow. My child, I've got bad breath. Okay, so there can be many reasons of rat breath for your child. One can be that your child is not brushing. One can be that your child is not drinking enough water. So other can be that your child is having constant infections. It can be either tonsillitis or it can be either adenitis or it can be cough cold or it can just be some ulcers in your child's mouth and your child cannot brush it properly. So there are multiple reasons or there can be some deficiencies if you have some fruity smell or if you have some particular smell which is a particular fruity smell or something your child can have early signs of some of the other major diseases better go to a doctor and check it but if you're just opening your mouth and there is your child's mouth and there is continuous smell coming things that you have to notice at your home is your child's tongue clean. Very important. Is your child's teeth having a very thin layer how can you observe that is your child having a thin layer. Same, again take a muslin cloth and just rub it onto your child's teeth. If the muslin cloth turns a little yellowish, that means there is a layer of plaque on your child's teeth which is not getting cleaned, which leads to bacteria in the mouth which produce a lot of pungent odors. Same on the tongue, if there is a coat on the tongue, this will lead to the pungent odor in the mouth. Secondly, if your child is not having enough water, what happens with that? we have dehydration and the saliva in the mouth becomes too ropey and sticky. You can actually do this at home. Tell your child to take a little bit saliva and do like this. If you can see the stickiness of the saliva, that means your child is not having good amount of water. So in such cases, increase a little bit of water or then channelize your child's water drinking habit and then observe the changes. Along with that, brushing is compulsory. So water plus good brushing will reduce the bad breath. Extremely important segment. Thank you so much Dr. Himaly. Have a great day.