Now we are at the last segment where we understand two very important things which are the other aids when it comes to oral health which we get in market very very common like tongue cleaners different variety floss different variety we don't know the age group how to use how many times to use we'll be talking about that Dr. Himali which I have at a drought whichever aids we are using like we are talking about so many things but there's a very important thing that's spitting how do I teach my child to spit because when other aids are added these things also be very important the child should okay so now let's talk about the other aids now the the aids that we've already spoken about are toothbrush and toothpaste these two aids are to be used every day now the aids that can be used later on are the first one is called as a tongue cleaner so now let's talk about tongue cleaners So these are some varieties of the tongue cleaners available in the market and the other one can be a toothbrush and the backside of the toothbrush has a tongue cleaner. Now you do not need a separate tongue cleaner if your child is comfortable with the tongue cleaner at the back of it. But if not, then this is the toothbrush that you can introduce to your child very early. This can be introduced as early as eight to nine months and can be continued till your child is six, seven years of age. Now what does this tongue cleaner consist of? So it is a silicon tongue cleaner with a plastic handheld, which does not hurt your child. Whereas the other tongue cleaner that is available in the market is a metal tongue cleaner. So ideally, this tongue cleaner is not advised for children who are less than say 6, 7 or 8 years of age because they might end up hurting themselves. If this tongue cleaner goes way back in the throat, it might create some or the other injuries in the throat or on the tongue itself if your child does not have the manual dexterity developed. then it might just hurt your child whereas this is a silicon one again this is to be changed every three to six months because again it has silicon bristles here and there can be certain dirt that can get collected here so it's better you change it every three to six months but it's very safe to use it so you have to take the tongue and just scrape it very gently on the tongue don't go far behind because your child might develop vomiting or a gag sensation so don't go far behind but what you have to observe is that is when you start tongue cleaning your tongue might look whitish or yellowish but after you've clenched the tongue your tongue should start looking pinkish. Yes it does but it doesn't mean I've injured the tongue. No. Sometimes people feel pinkish is the normal color of the tongue reddish is that means you've done it too hard and you've injured your tongue but if it's pinkish it's not purlish pinkish it's normal that is the normal color of your tongue But if it's white, that means there is bacteria growth as well as fungal growth on your tongue. Or is there a residue of milk? Yes. And again, this is not to be shared in family members. It's different for every different kid as well as the parents. So you have your brush and tongue cleaner set? Yes, you have a brush and tongue cleaner set. There are other tongue cleaners as well available in the market. You can use them also. The use is completely same. But just that there is need to change the tongue cleaner as well as the toothbrush time to time. Dr. Himalaya, my daughter is already 10 and 12 but still they are not comfortable with this. It's absolutely fine. Even in adults you can use a tongue cleaner like this. Okay. And or then there is another tongue cleaner which is in the form of a shoe shape and it has a long handle. Okay, just a silicon version of this. Yeah, a silicon version of this which is in the form of this and it has a long handle. So even that one is absolutely fine. It's just that you have to clean your tongue cleaner as well. Very important. So now let's talk about the next aid that is a dental floss. I think you all might have seen this. That is a dental floss. Do you know who needs a dental floss? Or does your child really need a dental floss? I don't know. I need it for sure because I have a lot of bad breath. And I have a tendency to develop cavity where my tits are connected to each other. Okay. So now let's understand this. What is a spaced and a non-spaced dentition? Can you please smile? See this. Can you see this? the teeth are very close to each other that is this is a non-spaced dentition which is the normal trait of a nadal. Oh. Unnormal. But in children normally gappings are present between the teeth which is a very normal thing but if your child does not have gapping that is your child has a non-spaced dentition there's nothing wrong in it definitely but what happens with this non-spaced dentition is that is there is food that gets stuck between the teeth and it's not clenched easily in this way if there is no gap between the teeth the food is stuck here and it is not clenched on its own or even via brushing your brushing will be like this but it cannot clean in between the teeth so for that you have to use a floss for your child which will go in between the teeth and clean all the dirt it will go in between the teeth and clean all the dirt so the flosses that are available in the market is one you have this kind of a floss which has a toothpick kind of a handle and a very easy handy floss and the second one is the floss in the box which has a thread attached to it if you're comfortable with that one even that is great you have to roll it on your fingers and floss in between the teeth or this one is completely easy handy you can use it and in a while your child can start using on their own now coming to when to floss do you floss every day? Ideally, yes. Can you floss every day? Definitely no. Will your child allow you to floss every day? No, I don't think so. So your child is not even brushing nicely probably. So what we have to inculcate first is brushing at night compulsory. Very important. Brushing in the morning also compulsory. After that, once in a day if your child is allowing, one more time brushing because if he's eaten a lot of sugary foods or sticky foods very good but this can be introduced for your child at least twice a week okay probably like next day and sunday yeah so what will happen with this today i've eaten something it will not stay in between the teeth for 15 20 30 days or years together with this what will happen every two to three days you're cleaning everything that is there in between the teeth so you're not giving the bacteria that are there in between the teeth food for a very long time so it will not let the bacteria grow or not let or not lead to dental caries so flossing in between the teeth will definitely help your child if your child has closed gaps if there is gapping you do not need to do it now probably you will have to do it once your child has an entire set of permanent teeth that's important when do i throw it like uh this one especially this is like one-time use this is definitely one-time use but if you can use it very nicely you can use it twice in a week and then throw it but along with this after flossing clean it with water if there's any food or if there's any blood stain here clean it very nicely and then store it but if you see a lot of blood because when you start to floss there can be chances of blood seen here because you might injure your child's gum so you have to be very gentle in going in between the teeth but if that if you see a lot of blood stains here then you throw it immediately but if you feel you have done a good job that is with time you will learn then you can use it for like once a week two times and then throw it important i have one more very exciting thing as an aid one is toothpaste which are very tasty or if toothpaste are not tasty my child will prefer mouthwash okay so both the things coming to mouthwashes is mouthwash indicated for a child who cannot spit it's the answer is absolutely no it's an absolute no it's then too it's absolutely no okay so now coming to the point of even when we are brushing your child's mouth and your child cannot spit we've mentioned that we have to clean your child's mouth with a muslin cloth yes and remove all the excess paste but with a mouthwash it's really difficult to do that So before you knowing, your child will end up gulping the mouthwash. So you do not do that. Plus, a mouthwash is not something that is recommended to use on a daily basis. A mouthwash is a medicament. For adults or for children, a mouthwash is a medicament. The usage is for 15 days to 20 days and after which the usage has to stop. Oh, okay. That's very important. So you have to consult your dentist. the need for the mouthwash and the kind of mouthwash you're using plus for children below than six years it is not recommended so do not even try using a mouthwash now coming to tasty toothpastes again that is it's not a complete no but it's an advice thing that don't take something that is tasty with that what will happen your child will not learn to spit your child will learn to gulp it because it is tasty and we want our child to spit so might as well take a little spicy at times for the child or a little stringy. You have an astringent kind of a taste which is slightly irritating for the child and the child will want to spit it. Rather than want to gulp it, the child will want to spit it and that is what we want to teach our child. That's a smart idea. Dr. Himalai spoke in one of the segments that if your child is younger, it's better that we clean mouth or we brush it at least twice in a day minimum is twice in a day and for rest of our life twice a day continues but i have one more question doctor like daughter goes to school my daughter tend to have tiffin there chocolate somebody's birthday cakes pastries now i cannot tell my child go to in the school bathroom okay brush gargle spit even if i tell my child he's not going to do definitely not so is there any aid by which where these tools are not required Okay, so let's talk about it. Even we understand that it's not conducive for the child to brush in school. It is not practically possible. So what do you do in school? So in schools or in public areas, you can advise or help your child to rinse nicely. Now how do you rinse? One thing, can you show how do you rinse? So with this what will happen You are just cleaning here But you are not cleaning here So you have to teach your child To rinse in a clockwise manner With this you ensure that the water is there all around And everything is clean That is one thing So when your child is in the school After your child has eaten roti, sabji or something like that That is your child has eaten complex carbohydrates Which are easily broken down So if your child has eaten something like roti, sabji and all Which is not sticky in the mouth The child can rinse nicely and the job is done In school, not at home But after your child has eaten something that is too sugary Or sticky or something like that So is rinsing enough? Definitely not Will rinsing clean all the sticky things that are stuck around? You can try it at home You can try it, eat something very sticky Or eat a 5 star And just let it be just rinse and see does it happen no no it does not happen so what can you do to aid this so at these times you can help your child by giving them something crunchy in the tiffin so what can be crunchy you can give crunchy fruits like apples like cucumbers like carrots you can give something like makhanas or some nuts so some fruits like this or some foods like this what will they do they will increase the saliva and the natural cleansing mechanism in your mouth when the naturally it is cleansed in your mouth and the pH is balanced. After that, if your child rinses, it will be a good thing. So it will have an added benefit for your child rather than plain rinsing. That's superb. Dr. Imali, I heard about like salt water rinsing, but again, does this come in this part only or it's a completely another aid that we can use at home? So now coming to salt water rinsing, is salt water rinsing always needed for my child it's no salt water or lukewarm salt water rinses if you have some infection or for that matter inflammation in your mouth that is after asking your doctor because what will that do salt water helps to curb the infection or the inflammation in particular ways that is why when we have a throat infection we are advised to take salt water rinses after tooth extraction after two to three days we are advised to take salt water rinses because it helps to curb the inflammation daily basis is it required it's unknown because you don't need this added salt for daily basis so it's not a routine it's not a routine aid it's a medicament aid that is after you've undergone a procedure or you're under some infection or inflammation and then your doctor will advise and then and then only you go in for a salt water rinse you do not do it daily basis extremely important thank you so much dr himalaya i think that gives us a huge clarity about toothpaste toothbrushes different aids available in the market and what is oral hygiene of zero months to six years there are many tips for us too thank you so much thank you so much all of you for being with us for this particular segment we are sharing of course material and few of the downloadable pdfs with you ensure that you use them for your little one and for your routine for you to understand things better thank you and bye