So Dr. Himalaya, this particular segment I want to ask you, when do I know that my child is ready for independent brushing? First thing is that and second thing, when as a mother I should allow my child to take care of their own oral health on their own. Okay, so let's talk about this. Can your child start brushing when he is one year of age, when he is two years, three years, four years? yeah definitely he can start brushing but can your child brush effectively at that time is brushing alone or effective brushing is needed so let's talk about this so when your child when can your child start brushing on his own is when this dexterity is improved the action that is when this joint is developed that is when your child can brush on his own now when your child is approximately three to four years this action is not improved so when do you understand that your child i was supposed to ask you that this action when my child will be doing so when does this improve there is no x-ray or this that you have to take there are simple things or simple signs that you can notice for your child that is when your child can start buttoning up his own t-shirt or shirts or when your child can tie his own shoelaces. Also, if your child can eat roti sabji on his own, like tearing a piece of roti on his own and eating it without creating a lot of mess. Plus, one more thing that is seen in Indian households that is dal, chawal or chawal and curry. If your child can eat chawal and curry like this without dripping, that is when this action develops. So at that time, the child can start brushing independently. But another question, even after your child starts brushing independently, do you leave them entirely? I have not left my 12 year old also. I keep asking, have you brushed it properly? Show me your teeth? Is there a white coat around? Did you do flossing? So I keep asking them 10 questions every day. So it's best recommended that after six to seven years of age, if your child starts brushing entirely on their own at least once or twice a week see that you are monitoring your child monitoring means you have to look inside your child's oral cavity and see is there any change you are giving instructions but how do you know is your child following your instructions that is by inspecting inside the oral cavity so once you look inside you will be the best judge to understand okay is there brushing is there plaque yet attached to the tooth is there smelling or is there a new development of a cavity? So if you do that, you will ensure that your child has good oral health. Wow, so basically keep monitoring. Keep monitoring and don't make it like a punishment like I have to check it today, I have to check it this week. Okay, it's like a normal routine thing that once a week mama does check up. That sounds cool. Second question in this particular segment is when do I know that my toothbrush has expired? So usually I used to think like every birthday I should get a new toothbrush from a child. But is there anything that it can go beyond birthday also? So what are the tools to understand? See, so the basic thing that is recommended for change of a toothbrush, it is every three to six months you should be changing our toothbrush. Not one year, not two years, not four years together. Every three to six months. Now the reason for this is when you buy a toothbrush if you observe this portion it is very concise whereas after some years or for that matter after some months when you start using a toothbrush this is what happens. That is there is fraying of the bristles or this is also called as playing of the bristles. So when this happens there is no effective cleaning plus this will hurt the gums as demonstrated to you. Now when you are brushing with a toothbrush that has concise bristles, it will brush only the tooth. Whereas it is not brushing the gums. Can you observe this? But now if you are taking a toothbrush that has bristles that are completely splayed, what will happen? When you brush, you will end up brushing the gums. Have you any time heard that your child complains, Mama, it's hurting while brushing. Mama, it's bleeding. Mama, I don't like brushing. This can be one of the reasons that your child doesn't like it. I will immediately say don't fool me around. Don't do natak. Just because you don't want to brush that's why you are doing this. We are not understanding the root cause of it. It can be this and when you are brushing like this for your child you are hurting their gums. And there is no effective cleaning of the teeth happening. So you are not doing good. In fact you are doing harm for your kid. So it's always advised that in every 3-6 months you should be changing the toothbrush. Another important thing that you should notice is that if your child is having recurrent tonsillitis, recurrent fever or recurrent throat infections or for that matter some oral ulcers or something like that, cough colds, toothbrush can be one of the reason for it. So what happens after an infection there are certain bacterias that harbor onto these brushes and they form a colony there and this becomes their new house so keep going in the mouth yeah so if we let this house of bacteria go into our child's mouth every day they will keep having recurrent episodes of fever tonsillitis infections pus so best recommended is every three through six months please change your toothbrush and buy a new one oh i have one more question dr. my daughter sometimes know the bottom part of brush from where the bristles are started okay that turns blackish and sometimes what she does is that she'll spread this with her hands clean that thing and try it doesn't get cleaned completely so what that is so see whatever we are using that is a toothpaste if you can observe your brush go and check your child's brush or for that matter even your brush the bottom of it at times there are residues of the toothpaste. Whiteish. Yeah a whitish toothpaste that is there on the bottom of the or the base of the bristles. Along with that there can be some bacterial or fungal growth that is white or blackish in nature that can be seen. Now can you observe this toothbrush? can you see the dots that is the black black dots on it yes that is basically a fungal growth that is seen on the toothbrush and your child is holding it like this and brushing if it's there on this part there are my new that is there on this part as well at times they will be visible to your eyes at times they will not be visible to your eyes so the best is change or toothbrush by at after six to three to six months it's best advice to change a toothbrush that's important next question um where do I keep my to brush see what you are seeing is basically near my sink there is a glass okay in that glass we hang all the toothbrush or we keep all the toothbrush and sometimes at the bottom of the glass there is a water that drips off from here that's there and that's what is creating this yes absolutely this is cause of the residual water that is there in the glass so now let's talk about where to store a toothbrush and how to store it so the first thing i know the pack containers one so that also i have so then keep it there i can just close it and keep it that is an absolutely no sorry you should not keep the toothbrush in something that is packed if you're keeping your toothbrush in something that is entirely packed you have to ensure that your toothbrush is completely dry is that thing is that the thing that you're even observing your your toothbrush after brushing so what you have to do is after brushing our everyone's toothbrush is a little damp you can just play it a little like this and all the water will dry off and after that keep it in a dry place for the toothbrush to dry naturally once that happens after that if you wish you can put a cap once after that happens not immediately don't put a cap immediately because anything that is wet and damp and if you put in put a cap on it it it will harbor bacteria so put a cap later after it is dried completely and if not you can keep it open that sounds but do not put it in a cased container or a cap when your toothbrush is wet but the way i told you know i kept it at the sink there is not a too much ventilation obviously my basin is like i have a commode then there's a bathroom then there is a basin how do i allow and how do i ensure and i cannot go and keep checking it is it dry definitely you cannot so the best way is that one thing to avoid is keep your toothbrush along with an area where there is a commode there is transfer of bacterias happening which we are not even aware of it maximum of the households have a commode and a basin and a bathroom area or a shower area all together definitely great but is toothbrush the place there no you can keep the toothbrush either in a pair area where there is an outside basin and the glass in which you are keeping it should have a hole beneath so that the water is dripping down the water is not collected inside the glass this is one thing that can help you all or then find another spot in your house where you can directly hang the toothbrushes you get toothbrush holders where you can directly hang single single toothbrushes that's but it has a cap cap is up to you to apply or not to apply how you can keep it open and always keep it there that can make it easy okay so we've understood about when do i change my toothbrush when do i where do i store my toothbrushes and how do i know my child is ready for an independent brushing habits so let's see you in the next particular segment where we'll talk about is there any fun ways to make this routine for a child that my child will look forward to it see you all in next segment