YAPI! It's 4.45 am There is a big adventure in our life This diaper Shreya I started it My family was telling me not to use it too much But in western countries there are 24 hour diapers So I bought 24 hour diaper Some people put on a long coat and then at night Some people kept it on for the whole day and then added the diaper There is a lot of confusion about diapers. Some people add cloth diapers, some people add normal synthetic diapers, some people go further and use biodegradable diapers. But then diaper becomes a dependency. Have you ever thought about it? Why did you think about diapers? Please answer honestly, not in a funny way. Bushra, I introduced diaper for not spoiling the child's sleep at night. I will correct it. I introduced diaper for not spoiling the child's sleep at night. We go out, right? There is a lot of mess outside in the toilet. That's why I introduced diaper. How many of you are such people who go out everyday? Do you go out on weekends? Or not? Do you keep diapers on weekends? No, you keep diapers more often. So diaper basically came into the picture as a convenience for mothers. I am just being honest with you. Shreya, you also used diapers. I also used a lot of diapers. No tension. Across the world research says that every mother uses 1500 plus diapers for her child. Every mother 1,500 plus diapers till one child grows up now this 1,500 plus diaper's garbage, you must have seen cows eat, buffaloes eat dog opens your diaper and leaks the potty many diapers are lying here and there but even after going out of it one thing you haven't seen how is the diaper's ad full of ink is put and it absorbs the urine 8 times and it doesn't come out again there is only one thing in the world that doesn't let the liquid come out that is plastic so every diaper's third layer is plastic that's why to biodegrade a diaper it takes at least 450 years So, till your baby's baby's baby's baby No Shreya, we use only paper glass Do you serve juice or rasna in paper glass? Yes, we do, right Shreya? Everyone, keep that paper glass in water for 5 minutes And remove the upper layer from the toothbrush, it's a plastic glass The one with paper coat on top, it's a marketing industry So is it anything wrong in diaper? Is it anything good in diaper? No, I think we are not even sitting for that dilemma Shreya, I have been wearing a diaper for so many days, is there any mistake? No, there is no mistake. We have taken what the world thinks is right, what is possible. Then why are we thinking about this? Very important 3-4 things. I had taken an interview of a nephrologist. There is an MD nephrotic surgeon. All of you, I will tell you some things in an open-heartedly class. My daughter had a kidney biopsy 3 months ago. It was a test for kidney cancer. And I went through, for those who know my children's age, it's with my younger daughter, who is 12 years old. Her kidney biopsy took place in December. She asked why did she went through this. Rest of the story is of no use to you. Let me tell you one thing, she has completed 12 years now, it took 13 years. Her report for this month, we have been struggling with kidney issues for the last 3 years. Her reports are telling that her kidney functioning is returning to normal My daughter's cholesterol was 500 plus And her vitamin D was under 6 By the way, don't say any poor girl, my daughter is a national player She is a national medal winner She trains for 6 hours everyday and she is just very very good But she had a kidney issue So where exactly does the pee come from? In your spine, there are two small kidneys which are protected by the spine That's why whenever there is an injury to the spine, the kidney function is tested first The kidneys are very small So a tube comes out of the kidneys Those who have a boy, their functioning is the same It will be different later, I will explain So there are two small kidneys, and a small tube comes out of both the kidneys and that tube goes and attaches to a bag, that bag is called the urinary bladder or the bag that stores the urine At the end of the bag that stores the urine, there is a small round thing It is round like this What is that round thing? It is where we urinate So the end point of the urinary bag is connected to the hole in the place of the pee. If your child is a boy, then the tube goes through that hole in the bag. So the place of pee is a little elongated. Then pee comes out of it. But even now, while sitting in class, Shivani has had a lot of pee. Honestly ask yourself, can Shivani control pee? No Asha, I find it very interesting. I don't want to go for pee. Shivani, you can take out 2 hours easily easily because as a person, Shivani can say to her own place of pee wait, don't go now, control it as simple as Rakhi went from her house she sat in the car and realized that she has to pee after half an hour but now there is no scope to pee for 1.5 hours she will stop for 1.5 hours no one will tell themselves that I have to go out, I will wear a diaper and go so that I can control the pee because your place of Sussu is connected with a place in your brain so after filling the Sussu, the Sussu does not come out after filling the Sussu, the filled Sussu gives a signal to the brain I have filled, I have to come out release the sphincter sphincter means that place then the brain releases the sphincter of Sussu then only the Sussu comes out if you tell your brain that I don't want to release the sphincter then your brain will not release that sphincter, it's by rule but the brain never gets this maturity that I have to make a connection between my brain and the place of the pee ideally between 2-3 years but then I asked that nephrologist, my own husband never peed in his sleep my own husband never wet his diaper My husband is 45 years old. Since the day he was born, he has never peed in the mud. And not even as a baby. Something must be different. My younger daughter, she stopped peeing in the mud in the first 2-3 months. Something must be different. I also used diapers. So what was different? So those nephrologists said something amazing. We just didn't want to add comfort to it. I said I don't want any mother ever to feel guilty for what she has done. Including Shreya. She did what was right. She said I am not trying to make you feel guilty. I am trying to make you understand. System is very simple. Before peeing, the baby cries. After peeing, the baby cries in wetness too. But some kids who go into deep sleep, they are so deep asleep that after peeing they are lying in the mud. If you people don't change the diaper, then the child won't get up. The child will be like that only. So mothers think that he will be wet, he will get a fever, he will get cold, let him stay dry. That's why the diaper was added. But then that lady said something very important. Our grandmothers, our mother-in-law, our mothers, what did they do? I used to take the baby in my lap as simple as my mother in law started on day 3 of child's birth as soon as the baby wakes up if the baby is taken to the toilet and then the baby will pee there and if you do this for next 21 days then the baby will permanently remember to pee with the pee it becomes very easy in first 6 months after that in 6 months solid food is added the potty gets a shape many of you have written that my child is scared of the shape of the potty my child does the potty standing he doesn't have to sit on the potty seat my child tells me that the potty is there wear the diaper then he does the potty in the diaper so from there all these things came into the picture I don't know how many of you have I washed the potty with my hands in my childhood so very honest how were we In the beginning we used to do potty, then we used to look at the potty, then wash it with hands, then put water from bucket and then take it out. So there is no question of fear of potty. But our children have not seen their own potty because it was always inside the diaper. Because of that, fear of potty is very very normal. That's why today we will know very important things. The whole course is divided into sections. There is a first section which will talk about how to close the diaper. How to close the diaper of the day. Those of you who are thinking that I have worked very hard, I take it inside and if I don't take it inside, I do it in the toilet. I don't know how will she understand this. To understand this sphincter of children, it can take 3 to 6 months. If any mother is thinking that she just has to do toilet training, then you have to take the baby inside for a specific time for 3 months the day you don't take him inside, it's over and the baby says, did you do this? and it's very very common so how do we channelize it? in the second section we will go to potty training so in the diaper training, we will do day's training plus stop the diaper for the day, we will learn both things then we are going to get into potty training those children who are not potty trained or have been toilet trained or their diaper is closed or sometimes there are accidents these sections are very important for them and third section is bed waiting tell me how to close the diaper at night so that it becomes very easy last diaper freedom from diaper class I have learnt two things lot of mothers asked me Shreya we are travelling so from last batch 9 mothers have Completed toilet training and diaper freedom in the day And what they are doing while travelling is an important question We will cover that today So let's get started A very very important part of the session You will enjoy watching this session AI or the online designing I have used it very smartly for this particular session Which was first time for me also But I personally enjoy doing this a lot So let's get started Open it Can you see the screen? Just a thumbs up Thank you I have seen you for few more classes so At the end of the entire thing if you want to appreciate The way slides are created you can always appreciate me I am enjoying all of you I took 3.5 months to create this slide and the research also took us that much time because we had to combine a lot of things at that time so who am I? in short I am a childbirth educator, counselor and a certified lactation consultant and somehow I feel that I can understand things from mother's point of view someone wrote something in the chat box but I won't be able to read it I will be able to read it in the washroom break because I have added presentation mode the chat box will not open in front why parents feel stuck you feel stuck and frustrated especially those who have 1-1.5 years plus you have tried multiple methods you have tried many ways to close your diaper some of you who have not tried any way straight away joined class may be you will know the right way then you will close it together that's also wonderful somehow child could not cooperate with what you were doing Shreya my child understands everything Go here, go there, want ice cream, want food, want potty, want to go out, want to go to the garden, want to play slide Understands everything, why doesn't he understand Sussu potty? Understands everything, means the child has a brain Conflicting advices, Shreya some people suggest this, some suggest that Instagram and YouTube suggest a lot of things because of which a lot of things get messed up Then how do we cooperate with that? Pressure from family and school 2 people have written that they want to train the child before going to school. Don't take their tension. If the child does accidents after that, it doesn't matter. We will give them 2 dresses and 2 chakdis. We will tell the teacher that they have been doing toilet training and diaper training but I will need your help. If there is an accident, please change them. Don't feel guilty. Don't feel bad. Internationally, people who live there do not take anything in schools when your child is not in toilet training or diaper training. Then you might have to wait for a few more weeks and then start sending the child. How many days can Shyam get results in toilet training or diaper training? If the child is ready, then in 7 days. If the child is not ready, then after 2 months break, start again and then only in 7 days. 2 months break for which child? Those children who are in their 1.5 years and you are going to try this thing You will try for 7 days and you think the child is resisting, 2 months break Those children who are in between 1.5 to 2 years and you will honestly try for 7 days Shreya, it's fun, 50% things are improved, continue No Shreya, the child resists, but the child cries a lot when he goes to the potty set If you take your child to the toilet, he cries a lot. Stop everything for 2-3 weeks. And then start fresh. And those who have a child who is 2 years old plus, If you think that you have tried everything in the training, but after learning this, I feel that there are few more changes that need to be done. Those who have a child who is 3 years old plus, they feel that they have done a lot of mistakes. For 7 days, completely stop training. Don't do anything. You don't have to tell about your problem, you don't have to talk about it, you don't have to do anything. Let it be as it is, wear a nice diaper. After 7 days start fresh. You get confused sometimes between readiness and willingness. There is a big difference between these two parents. Your child will be ready. I have seen a lot of children who have been potty trained in a year. Like my own children, my own husband, they stopped bed waiting at the age of 1.5 years. They never did bed weight after 1.5 years My own kids They were already toilet trained between 1.5 to 2 years Diapers were almost closed So the kid is ready but the kid being willingly ready that's in our hand It's not age specific, it's readiness specific The truth is potty struggles are not behaviour struggles Please don't think like this I start crying loudly. I don't know, my child is an adamant child. It's not a behaviour issue. Potty issue is not a behaviour issue. My child only poots in his diaper. He gets scared of potty. He gets scared of potty seat. He doesn't go near potty seat. I tried chair seat. I tried this seat. Still my child is not sitting. It's not a behaviour problem. It's a developmental process. So this course is a combination of two things. All of you Today whatever you will learn is half the course Yes Shreya I thought I will learn the whole course No, this is half course Which you have to teach by someone That I am going to teach you But you have to read some things So someone has constipation So we need a constipation diet plan of your children So we have clubbed that in written material So you will get written material But I think it will be uploaded on Monday morning because steam is not there today. So, you guys have some simple things. This is the outline of your written material notes which will be shared with you. You guys should know the connection between brain, bladder and potty. What is the complete guide to use diaper? Those whose children are very small, please continue using diaper. Third is, what is the science between stool and digestion? There is a chart of stool color, there is a chart of stool frequency. After that toilet training method and practice strategies. After that what is the change of season or environment? Shreya our temperature is minus 4. You cannot go diaper free. Not possible for you. Shreya my outing is going on here. How will you do? It is the season of rain. That is why freedom from diaper is difficult to be done at night. It is raining outside and the baby is peeing more inside. Warning signs and when to seek help. Means, if there is any issue of kidney, we can know that. Emotional safety and parenting approach. Special circumstances, all of you. Here we have ADHD kids. Some kids are hyperactive, some kids have less focus. We have also mentioned about them. Nutrition and gut health, we have to learn in detail. and FAQ In section 11th, there are many questions that you can read This is your return guide Now let's start the video course The full course is divided into 5 sections All 5 sections will be very important You will learn a lot, understand a lot and do a lot of practical things Myths Early training means better outcome Maybe my child is 10 months old or 1 year old I have to do his potty training That will not help Early training means good training. This is a myth. Truth is readiness training means fast training. So what was the psychology of grandparent? What do kids know? Just take them out and do it. They will do it whenever they want to. All of you, I don't know how many of you have done potty in the fields. They would take a box and sit in an Indian potty style. They will do the potty and they will come out. So literally, my grand parents house, we were 13 kids, my mothers are 7 sisters, all of them had kids. So we used to make them sit in a line for potty. Because that was a cultural practice. And it's a grand parents psychology, just make the kids sit, the kid will do it. Now this is what you all need to understand, how the body works. It's a simple thing. How elimination develops? Reflex Reflex develops, awareness develops I have a pimple, you can control And when your heart is in it, you can take it out But in the case of children, the nerve pathway Doesn't develop Meaning from the place of the pimple, the signal doesn't reach the brain quickly That's a very very common thing Second, there is no muscle development Which muscle to tighten, which muscle to loosen After pushing which muscle will my potty come out? How do I push? What do you guys know? Children don't even know in which style to push the potty. Awareness is still forming. I have to pee, I can't pee here, I can't pee in the hall, I shouldn't pee outside the toilet. This awareness is not yet in the children, it's still developing. So it's a very simple signal. The bladder instead of the nipple sends a signal to the brain that the nipple is ready. Then the signal comes from the brain to the bladder and the nipple comes out. If you create pressure and do early training, nothing is going to happen. Day vs night control. Day dryness, when will the child learn? All of you, if you want to make anyone a diaper in the day and get the nipple done in the day, it's a lot about training your child. You people start learning and teaching the child. Ideally, children learn in 21 days, but if they don't learn, then some accidents will happen for 2-3 months and then it will be sorted. So you can teach the child day dryness. But night dryness, maybe the child does a lot of bed time pee and we don't want that, how can we stop that? to be very honest, it is not in your hands staying dry at night is about hormonal maturity the child can succeed only when he is ready developmentally not when you are pressuring the child Shia I am working very hard from last 2 months please stop working for 8 days and then let's get back to it So toilet training, then potty training, then bed-wetting. So what are your targets? Everyone, we have to stop wearing diapers in between 1.5 to 2 years. So those children who are in their 1.5 years, you can also stop wearing diapers. But this is the maximum age of a day diaper. After 2 years, no one can keep a diaper in a day. As early as you can, you can stop day diapers. Daytime, the baby should have control over his pee, Shreya. On all of you, first thing is, the baby understands the pee. After the pee, he tells you that it's done. But he understands the pee. This will start only after the first birthday of the baby. For 2 years, your baby is fully trained to pee in the toilet. and potty, in between 2-3 years, the child gets potty trained till then if your child does potty in diaper or in underwear then it is still considered normal but again, those children who are 1-1.5 years old, we start the training early you can achieve all these results very quickly these are scientific timelines night time training So the baby will not pee in the diaper at night or bed-wet at night. You can do this between 2-3 years. But for 5 years, accident sleeping is considered normal. But ideally, after 3 years, your baby should not wear diapers at night. Between 2nd to 3rd birthday, the diaper is also closed at night. And last one. Shreya, my baby is in sleep, all of you are there. Many of you think that your child should go to toilet and pee on his own This child will achieve after 3 years Between 3 years and 5 years, your child will go to toilet and pee on his own You take him 10 times a day, but he will not go to toilet and pee on his own for 11th time In the case of parents, all these targets can be achieved early That's absolutely normal How long can a person control? A 1 year old baby does 60-90 ml of pee at a time and every 1-2 hours They cannot hold pee It will come and go Don't control it now That's why if your baby is around 1 year then it is compulsory to take him for pee every 1-1.5 hours by setting an alarm If your child is around 2 years old, then 90-120 ml of Sussu is done by the child at a time. After every 2 hours, it is important for you to take the child for Sussu. Even if the child says no, even if the child says no, my child uses diapers. You have to take the diaper out and take it for Sussu. If the child is around 3 years old, then after every 3 hours, But you can take your 3 year old child for a pee every 2-2.5 hours. But if your 3 year old child is controlling, then control the child. Don't pee now, we are not going to reach the hotel. Child can control. A 5 year old child can control pee for 4-6 hours. Can control pee for 4-6 hours. And usually the child can hold it for 1-2 hours. So your child will pee once in 4 hours. and can control for 1-2 hours bladder control develops slowly as the brain matures and holding ability increases naturally you cannot force the baby ok everyone take pen and diary this is very important thing for me take pen and diary everyone now you have to give yourself marks please everybody give yourself marks what she is saying. Does your child stay dry for 1.5 to 2 hours? In a dry pant or diaper or a long coat? Give yourself one mark. Number 2 Sometimes your child wakes up at night and the diaper is not wet at all. If this happens, give one more mark. Give one more plus mark. Number 3 Can your child pull his pants down? Can he pull it up? Does your child pull his diaper down? I don't want to wear it. Give yourself a third mark. Number 4. The child should have a minimum constipation whenever you do this training. Constipation is minimal. There is no such special constipation. Give yourself a fourth mark. Number 5. Does your child sit for 3-5 minutes at a time? If he is given to play in the water or in the garden, then it is his favorite activity. Can he sit at least? Harsha, he sits. If he feels like it, he sits. If he doesn't feel like it, he runs away. Very good. Give yourself one more mark. So, calculate the marks from 5 and write it there. Write it there for yourself. Now, open the next 5th column. Does your child understand that he has become a pee or a potty? Does he tell you or make any gestures? Then give one mark. After being a pee or a potty, does the child tell you that he is a mom, a puppy, a potty? Then give one mark. Those whose child does not tell, give zero marks. Does your child stand quietly in a corner of a grassy field and potty alone? One or two times Next Does the child make any gesture on his face before pushing or peeing? One or two times Last one Does your child understand two step instructions? Two step instructions means Come and hug mama Keep it there. Take a glass and drink water. Take a glass is one instruction, drink water is the second instruction. Does the child understand two instructions? How many marks did you get out of 5? Calculate. Now calculate how many marks did you get out of 10. How many did you get out of first 5 and second 5? 3rd column Is your child interested in the bathroom? What do you do inside? Does your child knock on the door? Is your child trying to look down? What is your child doing inside? Give 1 mark Does your child copy you in things? He is very interested in copying you. Give another mark. Next, can your child sit on the potty seat? Whether he is sitting or not is not a question. But can he sit? So, give another mark. No, Shreya, for any extreme reason, whose child cries a lot, even if you take him towards the potty, he cries. Even if he looks at the potty, he cries a lot. Give them a zero mark. No, Shreya, nothing like that. The child is happy, he is fine. He doesn't care about anything. whether it is 40 or not, whether you have sat or not, it is a happy-go-lucky program. Give one more mark. Those who don't have marks, you have to add zero. Does your child understand? You have done a good job. You are doing well. If they understand praise, then give one more mark. Now everyone give a total how many marks did you get out of 15? And write in the chat box how many marks you got out of 15. How many marks did you get out of 15? How can you get 18 marks out of 15? Who is it who got 18 marks? Calculate it again. It's not possible. 15 out of 15 is 15, 9, 14, 3 years old, 12 out of 15 is perfect. Swati said it's 10. Now your calculation will decide whether you want to continue training or not. Let's go ahead. Life is going to be very easy now because we are going to understand many things in detail. Let's check the scoreboard. Check the score of those who are between 12-15 You can start with training immediately Shreya, I have been training for a long time, the children are troubling me a lot Give me a gap of 8 days and then you can start Those who have marks between 8-11 They are still in readiness Introduce concepts and start with training. But you have time to achieve final training. The child is not trained yet. Those who have marks between 4 and 7, keep preparing, keep preparing healthy habits. There is a lot of time for potty training and toilet training. If someone has a score between 0 to 3, then forget it. You don't even have to get involved. Shreya, my child is 2 years old, the diaper should be closed now. No, no connection. Shreya, all my child's friends are trained, everyone is trained in school, but my child is not trained. I have a lot of cases, don't worry about it. Can your child count 1 to 10? Yes, Shreya, that doesn't mean the child should know how to tell the toilet. No connection. They seem smart, my kids look smart but there is no connection between intelligence and bladder control. There are two different things. Preschool requires it, there is no connection. If the school has a problem, tell the school that we don't wear diapers. The school says no, it's compulsory. If your kid doesn't have a toilet, then you won't have to wear diapers. We'll make child wear diapers for the school hours but otherwise we are not doing toilet training. If you want cooperation from school, then you will have to talk to them first. And then you can send child with a change of clothes. Diaper costs too much. This is not true. I think we all manage the cost of diapers easily. Daytime pay. Let's be excited. Now all of you, I am telling you a plan of action. Everyone's attention is on me. When your child is waking up, Okay, decide on the score. Those who have a score of 12-15, they have to start immediately. Those who have a score of 8-11, they have to think that they have to start now or after 15-20 days. But you should start training. Those who have a score of 8-11, even if you start, it will take a little longer time but it will be very easy. While waking up, start using padded underwear or training pants. Write it down. Padded underwear and training pants are of no use. They only absorb a single pee. And after a single pee, you will immediately feel wet. The child will feel uncomfortable. That's normal. After every 45 minutes of bathing, you have to take him to the toilet after 2-1.5 hours. So why would you take the child to the toilet? You have to go for this. Maybe my child doesn't come after 45 minutes. Okay, take him after 1 hour. Maybe he doesn't come after 1 hour. Okay, take him after 1.5 hours. So we have to set an alarm and take the child at a specific time. Yay, it's time for mom to pee. Don't tell, it's time for you to pee. Mom, it's time for you to pee. Come on, let's go and pee. Go and pee yourself and ask the child if he wants to pee. No. Okay, come out. There is no problem. If you think that if the house is wet, then keep the quick dry sheets or plastic in the place where the child stays for a long time. My child roams around the house and pees and poop in every nook and corner of the house Then you can't spread this all over the house Then you have to use the training pants And we have to change the training pants Padded underwear can usually hold only one pee Clean immediately You can get multiple pairs Accident My child pees just outside the toilet My child pees outside the toilet My son doesn't understand that he has to do potty. So what do we have to do? Your sentence is most important. Oh my God, he peed again. Oh my God, he peed on the floor. If you have this reaction, then it is very difficult to train the child in the toilet. If you have this reaction, Oh, it's done, let's clean it. It's done, let's clean it. Next time we will try to clean the potty seat or commode. So that's how communication should be and that communication will actually help you. How do training pants or padded underwear look like? See this is written here. Something like this. It is semi waterproof, dry and comfortable. It has 3 year cotton padding. So there is no use of plastic in this. no use of this. But this can be used for only one time. So these training pants look like this from the top. Here the whole padding is applied. That's why it's very effective. The dry sheet I mentioned looks like this. What is it that you see? Down Science of diaper Diapers are helpful for hygiene but diapers become dependency after 1 to 1 and half year The moment your child starts pulling the diaper or you are looking like two people to put diaper on your child that the person is holding hands or legs It is a struggle to put diaper on the child and you have to stop wearing diapers. This can happen in one year, in one and a half year, in one and a half year or even in two years. Shreya my child, happily wears diapers. And what is your score? Accordingly, you have to check. No body awareness, they will delay it. So the child should feel wetness. The child should feel the discomfort of the potty. When the child's The whole pant should be filled with soo-soo. But still, I will tell you the important things about the diaper. If your child is a month old, how much size diaper will he wear? How much kg is the child? According to that, how much kg diaper you have to wear? It's not the case. According to the age, you have to see the range of kg. And accordingly, you have to buy the diaper. Some things we have told you, the diaper you are using is wrong. If the red mark comes on the thighs and waistline of the child, If the belly button of the child does not cover the diaper, then it is wrong size. Leg gaps, side leaks, the diaper of the child leaks in one sussu, wrong diaper. Shreya, I have to tighten the diaper by pulling it a lot, wrong diaper. It is very tight, Shreya, my child has trouble moving, wrong diaper. Check the readiness of potty training. Your child gets potty trained after 2 years. 25% of the children get trained before 2 years. And 25% of the children get trained after 2 years. But both are absolutely normal. How to close the diaper? I will tell you the story. On the 7th day, the diaper gets closed. So the first thing you have to ask yourself is, can I take my child to the toilet every 45 minutes, 1 hour to 1 and a half hours? How many days do I have to do this? I am a working mother. I can only plan for 3 days. Check for any 3 days that you won't wear a diaper in those 3 days. This is for those whose score is 11+. Those whose score is 11 can wear a diaper in between. you will wear zero diapers in a day and those who have an ideal score of 11+, all those kids from last batch have stopped bed wetting so what you have to do is don't wear diapers for 3 days but after every 1-1.5 hours, you have to take the baby to pee those who have carpets at home, live internationally, there is no one else at home, there can be an accident So wear a diaper but to pee, still take him to the toilet. But every 45 minutes, 1 hour to 1 and half hour, it depends on the child's comfort. If you take him in 1 and half hour and you know that he has been raised, he has done it now. So you have to take him for 1 hour and 15 minutes. But take him. The more you take the child inside to pee, there is no compulsion that the child should do it. There are many mothers who say that they take their child to the hospital with an alarm, they take him to drink water, they do this and that, but this child does nothing. It's okay. Just take him. So, all those who have a score of 11+, do buyout what I am saying. You should have so many diapers at home that they will be finished in 7 days. Keep doing as you are using diapers. Take the child to the diaper rack and the child will only bring you diapers. Those who have kids in their lap, they will take the kids with them. Yay! We have left with 12 diapers. How many diapers do we have? Yay! We have 11 diapers. Oh my God! Dad, you know what? We have 6 diapers. And then you take it to one diaper. Now diaper finish. After today we will wear special chakdis. And you can just make them wear training pants. You can tell your parents if you feel pain in your body. It goes as simple as this. Once you have achieved this. It takes 7 days to close the diaper. Yes, it takes 7 days to close the diaper. Diaper of the day. So keep the diaper of the day and night separately. This day's diaper is finished. We have night diapers, we will wear night diapers. But we only wear this at night, we don't wear it during the day. And you will be able to stop that diaper to a very large extent. What will be the action plan, Shreyas? Everybody, please notice at home the timing of the pee and potty. Second thing, check the readiness. Check your child's awareness. Does your child give any signal? Does he stop his hands? Does he do pouty? He will be a pee-pee until he comes and tells you. Build awareness. Name body signals. You are feeling like you want to pee-pee. Don't introduce potty seat. Potty seat should be introduced casually. Look, mom has brought something new for you. Green, orange, red, whatever you prefer. Prepare environment, keep potty seat visible. Those who think that my child does not use potty seat in bathroom, everyone keep potty seat outside the bathroom. Potty seat should be visible even while playing routine. That's very important. Easy to remove clothes. You know the type of clothes we wear, it is easy to remove it. That's why sometimes the child goes near the potty seat and pees outside Because he doesn't understand that he has to pull hard or pull slowly So you have to make them wear something which is very easy to remove Just pull down and it's done In the house, so the children whose score is between 8-11 Or the people who are taking a break for now Shreya I have done a lot of toilet training, I don't want to do it For all of them Keep on making the child wear diapers as you are making him wear them. Create a diaper freedom at home. Yeah, from now on till we take lunch, there is no diaper. If you want after lunch, then wear the diaper again. So, for 2 hours or 3 hours, close the diaper. In that, take the child for pee. Then after 4 days, do it for 3 hours or 5 hours. Then take him for pee twice. After 5 hours, 7 hours of freedom from diaper time. because nobody likes to feel punishment guilty shame so reduce slowly slowly diaper time in the day stay calm no pressure no comparison diaper freedom begins with awareness not the force force ke sath diaper free training kha mein nahi karega before we learn and go for potty training iske baad mein aapko break nahi de paungi it's 4.32 quickly take a 5 minutes washroom break and Join back. Welcome to our Channel. Welcome to our Channel. Welcome to our Channel. Welcome to our Channel. Welcome to our Channel. Welcome to our Channel. Welcome to our Channel. So that was about the section on diaper. So now tell me one very important thing Even if you do thumbs up or you did thumbs up on the screen How many of you think that you are ready to close your diaper now? Just a thumbs up 1,2,3,4,5 of them, fair enough Rest of the people, if you are, ok 2-3 more people Rest of the people are not ready to close their diaper Our score is still low So what we will do is, 2 hours in a day, 3 hours in a day, 4 hours in a day, we will create such a diaper free time. And keep increasing it slowly until your score... There are 2-3 people among you whose younger child is 10 months old, 12 months old, you are actually training for the older child. For such people, you can create a diaper free time of 2 hours, 3 hours, 4 hours for the younger child. Then our child will reach there. why do you have access to scores for total 6 months? for 6 months, all your children including twins will get trained and usually it doesn't take that much time, it's very easy but we have to do it at a slow pace very important thing is potty training many people are not in class for diaper training, they are for toilet training only one girl is there whose child is potty trained but not toilet trained So for that person it is very important that if you are under a lot of pressure, please stop everything for 8 days and start again. And it will happen. So many times you people know that I have a mother who has to take a break of 2 months and then again start. And within 2 days the child got potty trained. Within 2 days. But if the way I told you, if your child is not ready then he will oppose a lot. and the more you oppose, the more your child will backfire so it's better to go on a break and then start again many parents think potty training is only about teaching child to sit on a potty so how much effort I put in, he doesn't sit on potty but that is not potty training sitting on potty seat is not potty training at all potty training in reality is when your child can understand with 5 systems that I have got a potty, only then the child can be potty trained. So which are those five systems? Child's brain, child's body, child's emotion, child's gut, child's sleep. What is the connection of sleep, Shreya? So those people who are saying that I have failed in toilet potty training, my child is not doing potty, my child is doing potty in diaper, none of these five things are ready. Number one, brain. Some kids train in 3 days and some kids take 6 months. There is no difference in parenting approach, it is a development approach. The brain must recognize that my place of !$%! is full or my potty has come instead of my potty. The kid will notice the wet diaper, the kid will start hiding when he does potty, the kid will start saying, If your child's brain is not responding, if your child's brain is not giving signal, then independent potty training cannot work. Unless you go and make your child sit for 15-20 minutes everyday, then it is a different matter. Otherwise, it is not going to happen. Body, physical readiness. The body must be physically ready to hold urine. Mama, I have done the pee So if the child can't hold the pee or can't hold the potty then how will the child tell you? At least the child should be dry for 1-2 hours Your child should know how to lower the pant You want your child to pee in the toilet But you know sometimes you take the child inside the toilet and the child pees standing up Because the child is not in control that I am not sitting so I don't have to pee That child's body is not understanding So child can pull pants up and down Child can sit for few minutes The child can sit anywhere You cannot train a bladder that cannot hold So when you say, let's go and sit, we will take it out after sitting, but till then, there should be a hold for 2 minutes. Emotional development of your child. Potty learning needs emotion comfort. If there is pressure for the child, stress, you are making him sit compulsory, then you will have to sit for 25 minutes, Shreya, otherwise you don't let my child get up, I also sit with him. If child is not emotionally comfortable, potty training is very very difficult. In fact, your child will hold the potty more tightly. Parents don't get scared of the potty. In fact, the child is curious to go to the bathroom. Mom, the potty is coming. The child who is scared of the potty, give a break of at least 15-20 days. So the child is not afraid of potty, the child goes to the bathroom happily, the child has to copy the parents, if the child does not feel pressure, what fun, I don't know what fun he comes inside, even I want to have fun, that's why the child can come inside. Gut. Gut controls the potty and sends the signal of the potty upwards. Children who have constipation, their bed weighting and potty training will be delayed. So first you have to treat constipation. Stop everything that you are doing and treat constipation first. How to treat constipation, many dietary changes have been shared in notes but it is very simple for now Give ghee to the child in warm water in the morning Do acupressure massage on the body Make the child sleep on the stomach, even if all the children are big or small, make them sleep on the stomach and play a drawing or song After eating every time, the child should walk for 5-10 minutes. Should not sleep after eating. And for constipation, formula milk or milk, calculate. Can't give formula milk after one year. And milk can't give more than 200 ml. So why is constipation happening? hard stools create fear in potty why can my child be afraid of potty? if his potty is tight which hurt him to push then the child will cry a lot till he pushes the potty that's very very common healthy gut for regular elimination signal, healthy gut is very important that's why constipated child cannot be potty trained that's common and that cannot happen so you need to take care of that sleep hormones, night control for those who are having issues with bed waiting night dryness controls sleep hormones not your training that's why ADH hormone reduces urine at night so when ADH hormone increases in the baby's body then only the night's urination will decrease in the baby's body If the child is sleeping in deep sleep, very deep sleep, then the child can't give the signal body to wake up. 3rd one, it is naturally mature, it can't be forced. Shwafi, do we have to close the diaper or not? If your score is between 11 to 15, then we have to close the diaper at night also. First you will close it for day and then after 8 days you will close it for night. Maybe there will be an accident, my child will pee at night, it will work. Then also you will close it for night. Night dryness is biological not disciplined. Baby, I am not able to do it, I am a working mother. I can't close it for night now. Okay, do it after 2nd birthday. My score is very good 13-14 But still I can't close my diaper at night Remember that you have to close your diaper at night before 3 years How to do it that I am training Potty training is not one skill It is an alignment of brain, body, emotions, gut and sleep maturity When these 5 things will be aligned The child will learn potty learning easily Look at this everyone What things do you have to remember for potty training preparation Use simple tools, potty, seat should be very fun loving You can also buy a potty doll for your child, how it looks I will show you They want to copy you so allow them to accompany you After becoming a mother there is no privacy in life to go to the potty or to pee So let the child know, he is asked to pee I mean other rituals We go and sit Let's go mom, let's sit Let's push the potty It's gone Let me flush Now I have to hand wash Do you also want to hand wash? Come on Maybe your child gets to hand wash again and again That's why toilet and potty training can be done Teach them the ritual and the sequence that you follow Posture is extremely important Extremely important for you and for the kid as well if the kid sits on the toilet seat or potty seat it has to be knee above the hip bone Shreya this is an Indian seat, where will I make my kid sit in this? I have the kid's toilet seat check if there is any knee above this bone So if you have a small toilet seat on which the baby sits, then the knee should be above the bum bone. In the lower abdomen, there is a potty. Until the pressure is not applied here, the baby cannot take out the potty. So a lot of people bring a ring on the top of the cupboard, on which you will sit the baby. The baby's knees are below the waistline, potty training is very difficult. Some people bring a ring on the top of the commode for the child, in which the feet are hanging down. The child should never potty with the feet hanging down. And third mothers, whose children are pottying in diapers, let them potty in diapers, no problem, but make them sit and potty. The child should potty standing and stop on an urgent basis. Those who have children of 10 months, 12 months, 1.5 years, they should start immediately. Those who have children who are older, you have to tell them that you have to potty in diaper, okay, but we have to do it sitting. There is a style to sit for potty and do. Make them sit. Even if he will sit in the air on two feet, even if he will sit on the potty seat. Sit on the potty seat with the diaper and let them potty. That will also work. But it is very important for them to potty sitting. So you have to remember this as a rule. and that will help you big big big time because that rule will help you understand exactly when we talk about potty training then what connection should be there of the child's posture so right posture is most important legs must be resting, if the child's feet are hanging it is very difficult for child to push the potty out knees must be above the moon I am sorry all of you, everyone take your toilet seat from under your eyes My height is 5'7 I have a standard commode in my house Even then while sitting, my knees don't come on my bum You guys check if your knees come on your bum as a mother No, Shreya, we never thought about it Shreya, I have an Anglo-Indian We sit in the Indian potty seat on the commode and potty Me, my husband, our child, everyone Interior guy said we will not make Indian toilet so we made Anglo-Indian toilet. We sit on that toilet on two feet. Shreya why are you saying this? It will solve lot of issues of your life. Weight, gases, acidity. Knee, waist, bum, bone. Talk to them about potty. Generally, we teach everything to our kids. I teach him all day long. They call it potty. I am going potty. Teach him some things for fun. Child, do you know that food goes from here to here in the body. Then it goes here and there. Then it digests here and there. It makes a sound. Then it goes inside and revolves around. Make them excited about how the food is travelling inside the body. Then how does the potty get made? I don't know how many of you know how the potty is made. So your body pulls and takes whatever is needed from the food. It pushes forward whatever is not needed. It pulls water and takes whatever is not needed. It pushes and takes whatever is not needed. It pushes forward whatever is not needed. That's how the potty is prepared. So you have to tell the child that potty is not anything normal. Potty is intelligence of your body. A waterproof mat will be important. It will also be used on your bed, parents. Especially those who are going to close the nightstand. Training underwear and regular underwear both will work Those who have scored between 11-13 and you have decided to stop now Those people if for 3 days you are going to keep the child's diaper free Do you have to do it day and night or not? It's your choice I am still talking about the whole day's training First achieve the day's training then you can do it at night But the child has to keep the diaper in normal or training pant for the whole day I have kept it for 3 days, I have to go out on the 4th day, what should I do? I have to wear a diaper while going out, but after every hour, I have to take out the diaper and do it. What do we say? You have to wear a diaper now, do it. Even the child gets scared, and we say do it, do it, wear a diaper, why do it, do it. Child, stop, control, stop, take the car on the side. Take out the diaper, that's so important for a child. and your child starts getting confused buy a potty seat or a ring adaptable 2 in 1 potty seat so this is 2 in 1 this is here, you have kept it on top of this so that it fits on the cupboard but you cannot keep the child hanging on the cupboard you will need some stepping if you need travel potty seat then you can take it if your travelling is too much training padded pants, this is your shopping part all of you don't select the potty seat, the kid has to select it what color do you want? I have already selected it, very good so if you have already selected it, then decorate the potty seat with the help of the kid bring the color weller make it exciting for the child Daytime potty Everyone please pay attention to me Potty training has a very important rule Think with your eyes closed When does your child potty? Who all do it in the morning? Who all do it in the afternoon? Who all do it in the evening? No, no Shreya, my child does it anytime It's ideally not possible Your child will potty after half an hour of eating It's a very common pattern So what do we have to do for that? After waking up, give the child warm water and after 30 minutes, make him sit on the potty seat. How long do you have to make him sit? 5 minutes, 10 minutes, as much as the child sits happily. While sitting on the potty seat, what does the child do? Bring the bubble one. The child has to blow bubbles in the bathroom. And you keep blowing the bubble. Or give the child a glass of straw to make bubbles. There will be a sound. Place a water tray under the child's both feet and ask him to dip his feet in water and play. If you have to sit for 5-10 minutes, then you have to do all this drama because he will sit there. Shoaib, you did something, you said to sit for 10 minutes. No problem, pick him up. After picking him up, he will do like this. After lunch, the child has to sit on the potty seat again after 30 minutes. Again 5-10 minutes. and after dinner also you have to make the baby sit after half an hour at least 15 minutes 10 to 15 minutes if you have not done potty in the whole day Shreya why did you say that you have not done potty all of you whose baby does potty in the whole day this training will bring your baby for potty at one time that dad, his stomach gets clear in the morning, nothing happens the whole day Indian toilet seat are best for potty and bladder they are best boy or girl, please don't let them do potty it's important, if they do it in diaper then there is no problem never never allow child to stand and do potty How can we make them sit peacefully instead of potty? Look at this, we get potty books. Let's go to potty, everyone does potty. How does this animal do this, how does this animal do this, how does this animal do this, how does this animal do this, how does this animal do this? We have to talk about potty in a normal way, as it is done. Potty doll, look at this, this is a potty doll. This is properly for potty. So whenever a child sits for potty, the potty doll also sits for potty. Straw glass, it's very important to take out bubbles in water You can keep your feet deep because until the lower muscle is relaxed, the baby won't be able to take out the potty You can make them sit with diapers on Those who don't do potty without diapers, they should first target to sit with diapers on the potty seat And that's going to help big time There are some challenges that you can face. Number 1, they are refusing to poop in the potty, they want diapers only. First, let them poop in diaper but only in toilet. Toilet seat or inside the toilet. Make them sit on potty with diaper on. Third, we did this with last batch but as soon as you create hole in the center of diaper, then the plastic, white colour dust starts coming out of the diaper. So if any of you kids can comfortably sit on the potty seat wearing a diaper, then you have to create a hole in the center of the diaper and put a tixo on the side. You have to cover the hole. So tell the kid that this is your potty diaper and we are going to decorate it today. Decorate it and put the hole from the side so that the material inside will not come out. Then try after few days without diaper. So this whole process is of few days Shreya. It will take 4-4 days at every point. At least. So potty training is of 16-17 days. Those children who do not potty without diaper. If you have already pushed and tried to teach, the child cries a lot. So after taking a break of 8 days, there are 16 days for you. Problem number 2, my child is very scared of potty or your child fell down, he has a problem with the sound of the flush, something choose the right potty seat, that's very very very important you can take floor potty seat, you can take ladder potty seat you can take a ring and you can give the table below the child so that his feet come up, not his legs hanging If you are afraid of flushing, then flush after the baby leaves the toilet. Let them practice flush paper. Sometimes the baby can do it well. Third problem, Shreya my baby holds the potty tightly but won't take it out. Holding it tight. Increase the water intake. How will we increase it Shreya? Increase the soup, increase the lentils, Watermelon juice You can always give them coconut water You can give them lemon water You can give them buttermilk Increase the fiber intake Kiwi, prunes means aloo bukhara Pears, they are great Schedule potty time 10-15 minutes after meal If you feel that your child is pottying before 30 minutes If it's happening too frequently, please consult your pediatrician. After eating a kaka, after 15 minutes, my child poot 10-15 times a day. No show doctor. Ideally, none of you should have a child who poots so many times. It's a question of childhood. Frequent accidents. I feel that my child is learning everything. Sometimes he poots inside but sometimes he accidents. Sometimes the potty gets out, sometimes the pee gets out, sometimes the potty gets pee in the potty. I don't understand what to do. Take a break and start again from the beginning. Take them to the toilet every one hour. Give them playful reminders to use the toilet. That's why you go yourself, take the elephant to pee, take the doll to pee. Don't make accidents a big deal. It's okay, no problem, next time we'll do it inside. Don't talk about it. Don't talk about it. Look, you have done this and that. Next time you should do it again. How many times I have told you. Don't get into the lecture. Lectures are worse for kids. Problem 5. Your child is saying that I don't want to go. I don't want to go for pee. I don't want to go for potty. You have done everything. Look at Devangi's face. It is all up and down. The child is saying that I don't want to go. I don't want to go. That's very common. Offer two simple choices. Do you want to go now or after 5 minutes? Now we don't have to go. Ok we will go after 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, put an alarm. That will help. When they take a decision, they will be able to go for it. We have to go and sit, play in the water for 2 minutes and come back. If you feel like it, then pee. Use a timer that they can see or hear. Your phone works too but a separate potty timer is better. So you can put a normal alarm. You can take a cartoon alarm clock. Make it fun. Like let's beat the timer. Come on, come on, the alarm is ringing. Don't turn off the alarm, dad. Before turning off the alarm, let's go pee. They would love it because it gives them a winning factor. Try to pee or poop before the time gets off. No comments to make child feel guilty. My child won't do anything with a diaper, Shreya. You told me, I heard everything. But he doesn't pee without a diaper. Okay. Close the diaper at home and keep the diaper outside. Number 2 Let the print of the underwear of the child be selected by the child. Let the colors of the underwear of the child be selected by the child. Clearly defined pull-ups are only for sleep. What does it mean? Keep a normal, regular underwear and the diaper will be available only to sleep at night. Rest you won't get it during the day Those who have score between 11-13, 11-15 In next session you will also understand how to close it at night But this is common Expect some accidents Accidents happen for 5 years That's normal If parents are calm They will not give dramatic reaction And that will become a game changer for him and that helps big time problems and solutions does your child do potty standing in a corner? it means your child needs privacy seat them on the potty seat and give them privacy and go out put some music around them make potty space absolutely calm and cozy give them bubbles, give them feet to dip So the kid will play for 15 minutes, that's normal. Don't make it an announcement. That the kid has pooped in the toilet. In fact, adults should make an announcement. Come on, I go and poop, does anyone want to come? That will work. This problem is faced by many parents. My kid sits for a long time, he doesn't have to get up, he just has to play with water. So he doesn't have to do anything but play. So what you have to do is, put a 3 minute timer and take him out after that. Something simple like a kitchen timer clock. Keep a special potty, only toy and a book. You have to give him only when he does that potty. Don't force them to sit for too long. 2-3 minutes is enough. They can blow bubbles while sitting. It relaxes the lower muscles. Shreya tell me my action plan, it is very confusing, I understood what to do but tell me exactly how to do it First, those who are in 8-15 will start Number 2, Daytime diaper is closed, means Daytime diaper is closed Shreya and I went to the mall, I wore it, I am going for a picnic for 2 days, I wore it You cannot confuse the child, you did not wear the diaper for 3 days, you wore it for 2 days, you did not wear it for 1 day, you wore it for 2 days That's worse for a child. So, diaper bandh means diaper bandh. So, you can stop diapers. Program for 7 days and just stop the diapers. Follow natural timing. Take him for a pee after waking up. Take him for a pee after eating. Take him for a pee before going to sleep. Celebrate success. Yay! Very good, kid. You peed at your place today. Many people celebrate like this. But that will not work. You have to celebrate the process. So if the child is going to the toilet, Oh my God! Your body is understanding. You have to go for a pee. Such an understanding body you have. So next time the child will not pee to impress you. Does my body understand? Okay, I should go there and do it. Appreciate the effort or the skill why your child could do it. Otherwise some of you will do well for 2-3 days and back to normal for the next 3 days. Consistency is the key. next time we will try in potty ok, no problem potty learning works best with patience and consistency one soft bowl every day should be there for your child, that is your target it will work even if you are in diaper or potty seat now we come to bed waiting those who have 1 year plus child, you said that your child stopped bed waiting at 1.5 years Yes, his accidents started till 3 years Sometimes in 2-3 days, once in a while But the bed wetting has stopped So, those who have small kids First, close the diaper for a day Take them to the toilet seat Achieve potty training before 3 years If no one's child does it now It's absolutely okay Put him on the diaper and let him sit on the potty seat and potty That at least you achieve Bed wetting is usually developmental It's not at all behavioral. Sleeping brain may not wake to bladder signals. In our relatives, one of our children was doing bed-wetting for 18 years. And you know, this example is not to scare you that how many days bed-wetting is done. Maybe his bed-wetting was stopped within a day. that kid didn't go to school for 18 years for an overnight stay his mom sent him a double diaper obviously if a kid is this big, he gets a lot of sussu even a lot of bass even a middle aged sussu gets bass his mom didn't send him anywhere so what did she say to that kid? I'm sending you this time she sent him 4 diapers but that boy's question was mom where will I throw the diaper and my diaper leaks too if I wear 2 diapers, it will smell He used to smell a lot of pee in his nightdress. So he told his mom that he wanted to go but he won't sleep the whole night. So that kid didn't sleep the whole night. Honestly, he didn't sleep. And he didn't do bed waiting. Obviously, he didn't sleep at night so there was no bed waiting. And he had a signal in the day. What happened after that? From next day onwards, he stopped bed waiting. It was this much easy. when he decided to do it that's why we have to make potty fun hey look there's a doggy potty doggy's potty is different chotu chotu potty is there mouse's potty is chotu chotu have you seen cow's potty? have you seen cow dung? it's cow dung, it's made from potty make it ADH hormone, reduce urine production at night at night it should be produced in a dry condition so that it doesn't have to be removed So these are the 8 things you will need to know if you want to do bed-wetting normally. So we will learn about these 8 things. Constipation, all of you. When your baby's stool is lying in the intestine, it is lying there but the baby is not doing anything, the baby is scared, or the baby had a crack there, it has become very hard potty, then the bladder capacity of the baby will also reduce. If the child has constipation, he will pee at night. Have you ever noticed that after 1-1.5 years, your child is urinating at night? Did you all realize? After sleeping at night, you urinate in sleep. Is there anyone in this class till now? You are urinating in sleep at night. Not talking about the day. There is one, yes. Is there any more? Yes, but when she is sick, no. If she is sick, then she is not counted. Perfect. She sits for 20-25 minutes and reads storybook. Is it okay? It's absolutely okay, Radhika. And she does it in the evening. Perfect. But she sits in the morning, in the afternoon, and in the evening. You know what happens with this? Potty time will shift to morning. That's the best thing for child. So, for those children who do potty at night, till now, the first and most important thing is to finish the dinner before 7.30. Number 2, start making the child sit in the morning, afternoon and evening. Then, even if he does potty at night, there is no problem. Fix your gut health. Add fiber food to your child's diet. Fruits, vegetables, soaked raisins, prunes. Ensure daily boil moment. You can give warm water to your child in the morning. Many bed-waiting cases improve only by improving their constipation. Deep sleep. No matter how much you move, my child doesn't wake up. Some children sleep very very deep. Their brain doesn't wake them up that you had a pee. What to do for that Shreya? Take the child to the toilet before sleeping Then take the child to the toilet before sleeping Usually there will be a gap of 1-1.5 hours between the child's sleep and your sleep Tell the child that mom will wake up There is no problem Take the child to the toilet in the dark The child is asleep now Let's go and sleep again Take the child to the toilet as soon as you wake up in the morning Consistent sleep routine is very very important You tell the child that let's do Shoo Shoo now, we have to sleep now, we will do Shoo Shoo after waking up. This is neurological maturity not laziness. Shreya but we are not knowing, my score is 14 but I don't understand, actually if I close my diaper at night, I don't know how many times I will have to get up. I will explain you that also. Excess fluid before bed, this is very very important. All of you. Close the water for the baby before sleeping for 1.5 hours. Or give one sip of water each. That will actually help. You can make a game. How much water will we drink now? One sip or two sips? Two sips. I drank it. Very good. Keep it. Make it like a game. Bladder irritants. Cola, coffee, tea, chocolates, soda based drinks. These things can't be given to the baby. Avoid this specially after evening. Even you should not take anything in the evening hours. Our child has a small bladder. That's why regular potty visit is very important. Gradually old time will increase. So 45 minutes to 1 hour, 1 hour to 1 hour and 15 minutes, 1 hour and 15 minutes to 1 hour and 1 and half hour. Avoid constant romantic sex. you have to check is your child coming in fun way or there is increase the timing long-term diaper use please stop diaper near 1.5 years please between 1.5 to 2 years toilet training potty training bedwetting everything is easy to stop whose children are already ahead of this but your score is between 8 to 12 they start so that you will achieve it within next for the next few weeks. Gradually diaper transition. Gradually 2 hours diaper free, 3 hours diaper free, 4 hours diaper free. If you keep the diaper free, then the child will say, shhh, don't wear the diaper now. Let's go and pee. Today mom also doesn't want to wear the diaper. Let's go and pee. And just go and talk. Encourage noticing body signals. Children sometimes regress due to emotional challenges. If a new brother or sister has come to someone's house, toilet training can come back to zero. If school is starting, then children start peeing again in the night out of fear of a new place. Children pee a lot in travel in diapers, if you don't stop timely. Routine changes big time all of you. So reassurance and emotional safety, mama is there, it's okay if you pee in the potty, then next time we will do it in the potty seat. Maintain predictable routine. Immature brain bladder connection The brain and bladder are still learning to coordinate This is the most common reason for bed wetting Patience is needed, regular toilet habits are needed It will slowly improve Don't worry I will tell you a simple guide We are having a lot of problems in our mind First, start around age of 3 If your child is already 2.5 years plus Then take a break of 1-2 months and then you start But Shreya, my child is only 1.5 years old, if I do toilet training for my child, if I do diaper free, then my child will understand toilet anyway. Then what to do? If you think that Shreya's diaper is 80% dry, back to back, If any of you think that Shreya's diaper is dry 80% of the time, you can turn off the diaper completely. No Shreya, my child's diaper is not dry, it is completely wet when he wakes up in the morning. So you can't stop the diaper completely now. You will take the child to the toilet, you will take him once in the night, you will take him in the morning but you will wear the diaper in the night. The day you think that you have worn a diaper but it is not wet Hardly a diaper is wet, it looks light But in the morning the baby starts moving or take it for a diaper My baby's diaper is dry 80% of the time Perfect time to stop diaper completely So those who have good score, they also have to check First wear the diaper for the day, then toilet training for the day, then potty training And check how many times the diaper is wet at night Entire hydration should be finished before 6 o'clock. Sip by sip, sip by sip, before 6-7, give them water. Inform and perform about wake up 9 nights. Tell the child beforehand that mom will wake you up for a pee at night. After 4-5 hours of bedtime, take them back for a pee. Tell them whenever you need to pee, you can wake up mom and dad. Your child won't go alone in the dark for a pee. Shreya, no I will keep the bathroom light on Don't keep it by mistake Sleep hormone will be disturbed and ADH will be disturbed again So you have to take it with you Shreya, how much time will it take? My score is also very good My child also uses diaper in limit We are using it only for night If you keep consistency of one month Then after 1.5 years Child can stop sleeping at night Within a month So it's very easy. If there are accidents, what to do? Keep a dry sheet under it. That will help. Wear padded underwear for a few days. For 8-15 days, you can get training pants or padded underwear. They might wake up uncomfortably and wet sometimes. That's okay. They cry. It's okay, child. No problem. If mom changes, you can wear new. Next time if you feel pain, you can lift mom. I have to say that. Just change the pants, bed sheet and reminder. Tell us when you have to go. Avoid pressuring if diapers are still full at night. Those children who have full diaper in the morning, tell them please don't force the child now. Just take it if you did or not. This is very important. You adjust the camera as much as possible. You have to wake up. Those who don't have it, that's another story altogether. We have to sleep. And we have to stand up. Shreya, what do we have to do? Tell me properly. I'm telling you, this is all for you people. All of you, let's do the first exercise. We have to do it after sleeping. Sleep. Sleep, sleep, it doesn't matter. No one has to see you. Sleep, sleep, adjust the camera and sleep. Sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep. Very good. Now bring both your feet close to each other and do this. Our child has to do this every day. All the muscles below this increase in strength and they get control quickly. This is a very effective tool. We call it chest health. How long does this child have to do this? Your child has to do this for 1 minute, 2 minutes, 3 minutes, as much as the child does comfortably. Do that much. Wait, we have to do 30 seconds more. 30, 29, 28, 27, 26, 25, 24, 23, 24, Are you enjoying this? 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 Get up. This is your first exercise. The second exercise is Snow Angel. You have to do Snow Angel on the ground only. But how to do it? You can do it on the bed also. You will introduce this game to your kids. If your child does this snow angel then your child will be very easily in the toilet. Very easily. It will almost be like a shock for you. See, you have to sleep like this. Hands and feet together. Now, don't do it if you don't have space. Open both together. One, two. Two, two. Three, two. This improves the control of all these things. So, what I am trying to say is that the signal should go up from here. That kid can do it very easily. Third exercise. Everyone sit on the bed or on the floor. Sit like this. And we have to walk on the floor. You can walk on the bed but children have to walk on the floor. Come on, come on, come on. The bed sheet will come out. Good. Come on, back. Very good. This exercise reduces the bums. If someone wants to reduce their bums, then do it like this. Now I will tell you for kids. This exercise increases the strength of their center muscles. So introduce it like a game. If you guys do it everyday, your kid will copy you anyway. And the fourth and very very important exercise which you have to do with your kids we have done this exercise in the gym It's called ball squat What is ball squat, Ayesha? You don't have a ball, no full force But if your kids have a ball, they will do it well This is a wall You have to keep a ball behind the wall Here, you have to keep a ball behind the bag The kid will rest on the ball and they have to do this This increases the focus of the child, improves the attention of the child, the child learns to sit in one place and all these muscles gain strength. How long do all the exercises have to be done? Don't ask such questions. Once, twice, thrice, four times, five times. The more your child can do, the more the child can do. But these five exercises are extremely effective. When you introduce all this in a playful way, then the child takes it very well. There is one more very important thing which you all should do. Again it is rare but from the nutrition point of view it is very important. Add black sesame seeds in the child's food. Add as much as you can. Mix it in the whole day and even if it is 1 to 2 teaspoons, it is fine. so you can add it in paratha, or garnish it with something else if you take something else, like a smoothie, then you can add it in that so broadly, if I tell you to keep a target of 1 teaspoon black sesame seeds in the whole day and black sesame seeds, what happens with this? it will control the night's sleep So this is a very very effective remedy which will help you. So go for it. Now we go for, someone has written something. Just ate fruits, unable to die. Love you Niharika. This will work for mouthwash. Devangi is not made for us, it is made for the child. The child does not eat mouthwash. The child will have to add seeds in black sesame seeds in some way. we eat Mukhwas but children don't eat Mukhwas Shreya how to do potty training without using toilet seat Tanuja, if we have to do potty training without toilet seat then you have to put a ring on the top of your bed you have to put the child on the ring and keep the child's feet on a table that way you can do or second way if you don't have a commode at home you have to make the kid sit in Indian style so the kid can't sit in the normal Indian seat he will fall inside so you have to make your kid sit in the Indian toilet seat somewhere else like Malhassan and you also have to sit with the kid like this that will work that will work so the kid will go outside Sorry to say, when we used to go to the village for potty, we used to pass half an hour in this position. We used to play and then we used to have potty. So it becomes just a plan. He feels that it is his mouthwash. Devangini, really? What is the matter? Give it. If the child takes it, then there is no problem. Okay. So all of you this will help in muscle strength and bladder control So you have to do these 5 things, now see the benefits What you did to your feet, this will regulate the nervous system And will increase the awareness of the body that I have a sprain What you did floor walk, it increases the strength of core strengthening and pelvic muscle What you did snow angel, it improves coordination and increases muscle control And what you did ball squat, it makes the lower body strong So it's a very effective thing. So what will be my action plan in bed waiting? If your child already keeps his diaper dry by 80%, you can close the diaper on that day only and not at night. First close the diaper during the day and then do the potty training during the day. But before sleeping at night, it is important to go for a pee. It is important to open the diaper once at night and sit for a pee. In the morning, take it for diaper and in the evening for pee. It is necessary. That you can start immediately. There is no problem. Within 7-10 days, I am telling you the result of last batch. Within 7-10 days, 4 girls told me that the diaper is not getting wet at night. And then we stopped the diaper at night. Healthy blood and routine. If the child visits at regular time during the day, then bed wetting will be reduced. If you manage the drinks in the evening, then no extra fluids. Remove shame It's okay, it's done, no problem Night dryness comes with body maturity not with over force That's very very important So kid's brain, kid's body, kid's emotions, kid's gut and kid's sleep When all these things will be aligned Then the kid independently Will have to remember themselves, pee, go and pee This will happen after 3 years till when you have to do it, that's important and we have to go for it, okay? anybody, what time is it now? 5.26, okay let's go for a question and answer but before that let's do some things honestly, everybody please close your eyes Now everyone first revise your score. Are you 8-11, 11-15 or below 8? People below 8, your work is very simple. For a little time in a day, give the child free time for diaper and gradually increase it. and take the child to toilet at equal interval that's it, rest diaper will be continued those who have between 8-11 you will wear diaper at home but 1 hour diaper free 2 hour diaper free, 3 hour diaper free, 4 hour diaper free you will keep increasing it and will keep diaper for night you will create excitement for potty in your child's heart those who do potty only in diaper and make him sit on the potty seat with the diaper and the score of the gym is between 11 to 15 in the next 7 days, the first target is the day time diaper should be finished maximum time will be told sometimes it will not be told so you will put the alarm and take him inside in fact, only three people will do this you will put the alarm and take the child inside to get him peed after eating the child after waking up for 30 minutes you will sit on the toilet seat for 30 minutes and you will give something or the other you will give a story book, something or the other if there is an accident, how you respond is very important if your child is adamant, stubborn, crying a lot, he doesn't want to come you are trying for a long time, stop training completely for next 8 days and after that start fresh now ask yourself, Shreya talked so much which of those things are applicable for you that's what you feel Yes Shreya, I want to do this Yes Shreya, this fits perfectly for my house I think I have got this, this is what was lacking and I want to go for it Think about it And with the belief that you will achieve freedom from diapers Between or rather before 1.5 to 2 years You will achieve potty training Somewhere if you start early, between 1.5 to 3 years, it can take 5-6 months to train 5-4 people in 3 days. Whenever you feel frustration, you go for a break. And then bed waiting is also closed on night before 3 years. After that if there are accidents, then only accident management we have to do. Slowly open your eyes. That's it what I wanted to talk to you. 2-3 very important things. For next 8 days I will be active on your WhatsApp group to keep answering your questions. I still answer people from last month. But I am not committing to that. But I will be there on your group because no other team member will be replying on a freedom from diaper group. It's only Shreya. Nobody else replies. 2. Your notes will be shared with you on Monday and I will update you on that day and your written diet plan and everything you will be having Your recording will be uploaded today You will see where it will be shown that I will update on your WhatsApp group but it will be seen on the website and you will have access for 6 months Your child will achieve within next 6 months achieve absolute freedom from diaper day be night be in fact take Salkar is covered travel there for me achieve carload that's the only target we have take any questions that you want to ask me you can raise your hand to look come logo then just directly top hi Shirani this Ma'am, I took your breastfeeding night session. After that, it took me 3-4 days and the process was very easy for me. Thank you so much. And you gave a tip that if he asks for milk at night, then start offering him water. He is taking water till now. In fact, it happens that the sipper keeps it with him. He drinks a lot of water before going to sleep. So sweet of you. Now we have to fill seeper less. So if someone's child drinks a lot of water at night, it means that the child is drinking less water during the day. So we have to slowly slowly increase water intake of the day and slowly slowly decrease water intake of the night. So we can ask the child, we have to fill water up to this line and this line, mark it with a sketch pin. Blue line and red line, till red line only, we have this much water at home throughout the night. Then slowly reduce it to red light, green light. Do it slowly and then it will help the child to sleep for longer time. Without water. It is taken before sleeping, not while sleeping. It is taken while sleeping properly. Like you told me. You mentioned cotton pants. Training pants. So, can we use cloth diapers for that? Cloth diapers will absorb the urine. It gives diaper effect. It will give dryness. Okay. Normal training pants. Okay. Okay. Okay. The second is Niharika. One minute, Niharika. Daytime diaper I have stopped. Nighttime diaper I want to stop. Morning time sometimes the diaper is light. Sometimes heavy, sometimes in between. And my score is 12. My little one is 2 years old. Yes start freedom from diaper, start night diaper stopping also. If you feel that the toilet training is going very well and we will manage the evening water too. Two years child can become diaper free. But do this, so many diapers left, so many diapers left, so many diapers left, make it like a story and then stop. It's a good time, share good news with everyone after it's done. Yes Niharika. She is 14 months old baby and she never wears diapers during the day. Apart from that, I use padded underwear. She has this habit of sleeping after feeding. So, her diaper is always dry in the morning. Very good. I did your sleep training and I stopped feeding her at night. So, he is having trouble sleeping. So, he puts some load on me and sleeps. So, after that time, one of his night's pee started. Okay, then you can. So, ideally, do a simple thing for now. First, let the sleep training be set. It takes 2-3 weeks for Nihari. Let them go through sleep training settlement. Once the sleep training is set, then you will feel that it is a one-time pee. Means, almost 80% it is dry only. Then we stop straight away on the night's diaper too. So probably, next 4 weeks more. Okay, mostly he takes feed once in the morning at 4-5 am, rest, the feed is almost stopped at night. Perfect, if it is enough, observe, mostly after feeding at 4-5 am, he will have a hangover. So after feeding, you can take Dream for a hangover. Okay. Dream pain. And that will help. Very good. That's good improvement with sleep training. Thank you. Thank you. Yes, Radhika. What did you say, Nyarika? Amazing session on sleep training. Amazing session. Thank you so much. I have done a lot of your courses. It's very good. Honoured. Love you so much. Means a lot. Yes Radhika. Yeah, I agree. I think you should have some Shreya Shah Club, you know. Because I have also done so many trainings. I have done early Gurukul. I have done solid food. I have done stop breastfeeding. Stop breastfeeding was like a miracle. I had so many nightmares that I couldn't stop breastfeeding. But it just went on so smoothly that I was myself shocked. Thank you so much. It means a lot. So this one is only thing is that she knows how to do susu and everything in the toilet seat. and she will be like, we have a nanny so she will be like, sister, come on, wash your feet. She will be like that. She has got that habit that I will do the and someone will come and wash it. And that's it. And now also while we were in the class she did that and then she went to the bathroom, washed her legs and came out. Lovely. Give the baby to wash. That you know, I tell her Yes, give it to the child to reach the marriage. That will create more chaos. There are two ways to handle this. If the child says, I have peed, you can reach. Then tell the sister too, you are peeing today, if you pee outside after tomorrow, then the sister will not reach. The smell comes that we have grown up, so mom is keeping clothes there. If you get peed, then you can wash it yourself, the sister will put the water. and if you think that you don't want to reach then you have to pee inside when a child learns to give instructions that I have done it now you come and reach it's called a strategic move Radhika strategic move means to respond strategically means he is understanding that I am doing it now you come and give so just tell didi also that didi you don't want to reach you have to reach them if people come at home and they have done it somewhere on the road just put a chair on the toilet and tell her and don't say that sister will never ask you have to tell that child for half an hour sister is not going to clean it it will remain there if you don't for half an hour because it should not be that we never clean it we can't keep it for 24 hours half an hour or 15 minutes we will keep the toilet like that so just keep it for 15 minutes and then we make child understand Do you know that baby smells of pee? whether it is your sister, mother or yourself It is so difficult sometimes, that is one idea Idea number 2 We can tell our sister to take the baby to the side and tell her Baby, do you know that you pee outside? I have difficulty in peeing I can smell it too We will try to do it next time inside Please, it will help me So because our child has empathy If child wants to help They will do it to help nanny Not for because you should do it there. And Radhika, as much as I have seen you in the other sessions, your child has an empathetic approach. Means he likes to help animals. Your child cares for things. Your child is not violent that he believes in breaking things. Your child keeps books very well. Means he understands empathy. Then child will care for a person. That's very effective. and the advice you gave me that you should go and take her so a lot of times I do that but she comes running after that that's absolutely okay but still she will continue continue, you just want to say that it's time to go and she does it you can add on some reward here one more thing, if you sit there and do it you will get to blow bubbles there Radhik your kids will love this 100% what mom brought today, we will do it inside not as a bribe my dear it's as simple as there is a toy or a book that we have kept it's for a toilet bubble so whenever we are going to do it in toilet we are going to do bubble later so nanny you know what I have brought today I am going inside to do it, I am also going to do bubble you have to try, you can just join us Whether you want to join or not, that's your choice. Okay, this is a good idea. Thank you so much. Yes, Kruti. Hi Shreya. Hi my dear. Actually my mom suggested that in the early morning when the child gets up, give him milk. And then they will do the potty training easily. So what I did was, I didn't give milk because he doesn't like to drink milk. So I gave him the coconut milk. When he was drinking coconut water, it was around 200-300 ml. So after drinking coconut water, he would do the potty. And when his potty would start, I would go and make him sit on the seat. And then he would do the potty, like completely finished. The problem was, he refused to drink water after, like if I'm not giving the other thing. Coconut water. He just needed coconut water the whole day. Now I don't know, some people say coconut water is good, not bad. I don't know how to manage it. It's too much of electrolytes. So, you bring coconut water and keep a bottle of it. And tell the kid that we have got one bottle of coconut water. It means that a small bottle of 300 ml to 400 ml is available. The transparent one. The kid has so much of coconut water. You can have that much. And if he doesn't drink normal water, then there is no problem. You need to increase the buttermilk intake. And the coconut syrup intake. And lemon water intake. Slowly slowly, the tea comes to water. Flavored water. For a day he stopped drinking water. So I had to stop the coconut water. Now he is asking for coconut water but I am scared to give him the coconut water. If you feel like it, then you can take one small glass of coconut water. You will get 120 ml or 130 ml of water. Yay! The kid brought coconut water for you. You can do one more thing. If you have two bottles of coconut water in the glass, then you can keep one bottle of coconut water, one bottle of buttermilk white and one bottle of normal water. You can keep three things. This is what we have for drinking. Tell me which one you want to drink. But that works right? If we do it, we can make her sit there. 100% that works. No problem. Good idea aunty. Everyone is trying. Good idea aunty. Don't give milk. Giving milk is not a good idea. Giving coconut water or normal water or warm water is a good idea. Thank you. Love you. Shubha. Hi Shreya. Hi dear. I have done everything for you, I am very happy. My son is 17 months old. I have not done anything for him. I wanted to do the course first and then do everything. Beautiful. I have a small question. Should I take a sleep train or not? Yes, you want to share this with me. It depends on you Shubhika. Shubha, if your child wakes up once in the night, Yes, once or twice. If it is once or twice, it is not troubling you. Then don't sleep train. When you need a child between 1.5 to 2 years, stop breastfeeding and sleep train will be done automatically. Okay. That will be done. But those who have small children, they get up more than twice, their food gets compromised. So, they might suggest to go for sleep training. Okay. And my child has score 9. So, what should I do for 40 days? What did you say? Score. 15 is the score. Core is 9. So you have to start the initial steps. Potty training will be done but it will take a little longer. But if you do toilet awareness and potty training together. Like after waking up in the morning, they have brought a new scene. So Shubha your introduction itself can become so exciting. Come on, mom is sitting, you also sit. For 10 minutes, while reading a book, playing something, or doing bubble, sit down. sit on the chair, after lunch, after dinner and start the potty discussion. I will sit on my comand in the bathroom and my small potty seat. So that helps big time. Let's start both, just achievement will take a little longer Shubha. Some children achieve maturity wise early also, might be 2-3 weeks. 3 weeks Sometimes it can happen that you have sat on the potty seat and the baby has done it after coming out That's okay Thank you Thank you Love you Chuba because of your tone you are always there Very beautiful tone Yes Shushmita Thank you Shreya for the session and life is becoming easier with the toddler eating session So creativity is going on and it is improving. So thank you for that. Thank you so much. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. He is eating food. He is eating better. And I have your book as well. Yum Food Diary. Yum Food Diary. So I started implementing it gradually. I got it a while back. But I made a plan to explore it and implement it. So I started some things. Thank you for that. Thank you. Sushmita, next book we will be launching next year. We are writing a book called as Yum Tiffin Diary. diary your yearly planner it will be for four year to elder age group but thank you for this feedback it just makes me more motivated to write better and looking forward to that book as well thank you yes My son's score is 11 and if we are training at night with diaper, then we have to follow the same schedule at night. Sorry Sushmita, I just understood a bit of the question. So first I will create the conclusion. So, taking it after 1.5-2 hours is only for day, not night. For night, you have to get it peed before sleeping and in the morning, you have to get it peed as soon as you wake up. This is fixed. In between, if the diaper is dry for a long time, then only you have to close the diaper at night. You have to observe wearing training pants at what time it usually does. Then only you can take it for peeing in sleep. But if you think, no Shreya, its diaper gets proper wet in the morning. So, you have to pee in the morning and at night. And in between, no changes until the diaper is dry. It doesn't stay dry or light till then. And sometimes, if he is sleeping till 7-8 am, it becomes heavier. Yes. 99% at 6 am, the baby wakes up with the sun and goes back to sleep. So, this movement is what it does. So, when you wake up, I don't know what time you wake up, if you don't wake up, then wake up around 5.30-6 and make him sleep. If he wakes up, then he has woken up. If he doesn't wake up, then make him sleep again. Okay. Okay. And we have Indian toilet or western toilet, but we prefer Indian toilet. We keep it as a backup. But the question of the seat, that there is a risk in it, that it starts to play, there is a fear of falling. So whenever we go to train him, we make a place for him in the bathroom. So that we can use toys there. Toys means to keep them fixed. All the toys have to go in the toilet at night. Specific books, specific toy or bubble. That's most important. And Sushmita, you have to tell the child that this is a special place for you because it is a little big. You introduce it as an excitement. That will work best. and if he feels it, he tries to take off his trousers or pants he has tried many times, but it happens many times so some other dress or string is good for kids normal pyjamas are good for them but if the kid takes it off, we say that you have gone out and peed don't appreciate it What a weight, what a strength you have You have taken the pan down and come in an organized way So you motivate that your child is organized enough That he is pulling the stick out of the pot And whenever you sit for the pot After that tell him to pull the stick up He really enjoys it that I know how to do it And if your child takes the pan down once or twice a day Means he knows We just have to make it consistent using alarm And many times we psychologists say that after 2 years we should not change clothes in front of children. So the habit of taking children to the toilet is not a problem. To be very honest, Yes, sorry, sorry, say it, say it. No, no, I mean if we are doing it so that they see how it is. Usually for 3 years as per toilet training rule you can continue because children get the exposure that you are also going. As the child becomes comfortable, we start teaching the child privacy. You know, some things are very personal to us. If the mother is doing potty, then the mother can do it alone. If the mother has to do potty alone, then no mother. Because the child is scared when the door is closed. So you can tell the child, it's time to do potty. Oh, mom is not interested now. You sit, mom will sit outside with you quickly. So, gradually she will know that mom is not sitting with me, even then I can do it. so that you have to train slowly, sorry that's part 1 part 2, what you asked, parents all of you, potty training related question not but very important question you have to decide what you want to keep open in front of kids so in my house, it is not allowed to take off inner wear and roam around in front of kids inner wear will be on and usually towel wrap around but yes changing of the clothes, I have kept it open though inner wear will be on and then I have kept it open, might be because I have daughters I have kept it open because they should understand breast, they should understand all of these things so if you have a son, then you have to decide in the change of clothes would you be okay changing only a t-shirt, would you be okay changing only a pants that's a personal comfort decision you should not roam around naked in front of kids after 3 years that's true Raheela thank you Hi dearest, how are you? Look at this woman. Because of this woman, the class is delayed by 15 minutes. Rahila, you are most welcome. Anything for mothers. Tell dear. I am extremely sorry. I booked the class after looking at the chart. Otherwise, I had a patient. So I knew that I was going to be late. And I am extremely sorry for everyone. and also Shreya you are what should I say God sent some angel for us mothers and everyone will accept because I am telling you honestly my baby is 2.5 I wait for you for every major milestone and I don't use my brain I don't use my brains. I am tired. For food, I was waiting for you to come to class. I will join that. For shopping, breastfeeding, I waited for you. Come on, start quickly. For diapers also, I was waiting. The last lot was out of stock. It was booked. So I couldn't join. I was just waiting for when I would do it. I said, you have to come 3 years before this class or else my child will be left in the diaper. It's finally here. And thank you so much. This was all I had. I have been using this diaper since a long time. He is diaper free from Sussu. And now I am thinking of eating. I said, please give me a diaper. I have a potty. He says that. No, no, we will go like this. And once I tried to see how he responds. He did the potty on the floor. He didn't control it. That is of course maybe a good thing. But he started howling and crying. Of course, as you told me, the baby didn't see the potty. What is this? He started crying. Mom, the baby is coming. Mom, he sneezed. My main concern was how am I getting him out of his diaper for potty. But I liked the bubble one because he plays bubble outside in the park. I never allowed him to go inside the house because he has stains. Why should I allow him to go inside the house? He is allowed outside. So now he will be allowed to do it in the bathroom. You can also try bubbles. It depends on the child. Glass one, straw and bubbles one. And the second thing I wanted to ask, I saw recently in my friend's house, they have that ladder potty set. Yes, yes, yes. And it also has a foot rest. Which was very nice, attractive for me. That I will only put this on my children. But I will wait for Shreya. When Shreya gives a thumbs up, then I will go for it. You see, I will show you. It's a very important thing. It's called ladder potty seat. Ladder and it gives the like foot support. That's important. This is ladder. So, ladder potty seat is called this. In this, both your things are achieved. Knee is automatically above the bum level and legs are rested. Yes. Only this adjustment is wrong. All of you check. Its knee is still on the bum level, not above the bum level. So, you can adjust this ladder according to the height of your child. So if Rahila said bring me this, then this step should be a little higher. Because the knee will come up a little at the bum level and you are sorted with this. Yes, there are many of these. It comes in 3 steps, 4 steps. So yeah, I did some research before coming to your class that what I will have to bring. Because I haven't tried anything yet. My baby just saw that when they grow up here, they do it on this. I put so much in it that after one month you will grow up and then you will do it in this I fed so much in her brain that mom is big so mom does it in this You will do it in this if you grow up All of you you can try this what she is telling If someone's child is resisting then you can say that we will take a break now Now you will grow up after a month then we will try again Beautiful I told him that since he is a baby, he will not do it in this. He will do it as per his diet plan. And Sushu also, near the drain, he does it. He takes water in a mug and chaps it and he does it in the bathroom. So I was just waiting for his falls to grow. That after a month, he will grow up. Then I will put you in this. So I will be taking him to the toy store and from there I will bring him potty. But I have to get her to wear a diaper in the beginning. Because I don't think so. Stay with the diaper. After a month, she will grow up. Then she will wear the diaper. Then tell her that mom left the diaper when she grew up. And after 15 days, you will grow up and then we will leave the diaper. I gave her jet spray to play. See how the water comes out of it. This water goes far. This water goes near. I mean, I was introducing such things playfully. Excitement of 40. I was giving talent build up, I just sat him down. He doesn't know how is that experience. This flush, see he is saying gud gud gud. He is saying gud gud flush. His stomach is saying gud gud. Very good, very good. I knew that, because I remember in my childhood I was very scared of flush. I mean if someone flushes, then I used to get very scared. What is this sound? What is this sound? to scream in the water room. I mean, even till very late. So, I knew that this flush thing might hamper it. So, I have given all that build up. Today is your day, today after you, so, I will start my this journey also. Come, come, it will happen. Our baby is going to be born now. Our baby is going to be born now. There is a lot of time for the birthday. It is 6 months, 2.5, normally, it is okay. Next, I will celebrate your birthday. I'll get the cake and you'll grow up. Yeah, we were like, yay, 2.6 years. Now we've grown up. Mom was also 2.6 years old. Yes, yes. And diapers too. I thought 9th is the last packet. But the last packet is coming. After that, diapers won't come. Perfect. So, yes, this is what I was only waiting for 9th May. Now it's done. So let's hope for a new battle. To be very honest, because child is into the right age and prep have happened, I think it will be a surprise for you the ease with which it happens. The preparation you told me, I am estimating 3 to 7 days and child should tell you, mom I don't want diaper, this is so exciting, I want to sit on the diaper and do potty. You can do it, but if child wants to do potty, then he will have to take out the diaper otherwise how will you sit? Yes, because he is a little mischievous. He needs a screwdriver, he needs a hammer, he needs a wood. He is that kind of boy. He is on his father's side. He is on his father's side. Mother is on his father's side. He is an engineer. He needs a screwdriver, he needs a stick, he needs a knife. Very nice. Tell your husband, good job done. done good jeans so he has all the toys of that screwdriver and all that toys yes so all that I have told you in bathroom that he makes toys out of it and he has a screw but okay inshallah for you let's try it will be done by the way love you thank you so much thank you love you so much all of you it's 5 58 I have got another session starting in two minutes so those who have written questions in chat box I can't answer them I will keep it on hold, you can put it on WhatsApp group, I will answer it. Shivani and Devangini, if you can quickly ask the question, can I just answer these two questions? Ma'am, what habit did I put on him that he stopped using wet wipes to clean. Like he sneezes, I tell him to go and wash his face. So I sit on the seat and wash it with the help of my love lamp. But when I sit on the upper ring, I don't want to sit on it. Yes, because they don't like it Shivani. It has to be something that is creating very excitement. They are afraid that I will fall from inside the ring. But it was the first time she did it by sitting on it. Yes, but their balance would have gone at some point. And they would have felt that I might fall. So the best can be buying that ring of his choice Okay, okay And dead body And other is, like right now you are in the park for 2 hours or in the play school for 2 hours What to do in that situation? So for 3 days even diaper and everywhere diaper has to stop So when there is no playgroup time, do it in those 3 days In the garden also you will take go with training pants And a plastic bag with you If you get a diaper and everywhere diaper has to stop so when there is no play group time do it in those 3 days even in the garden you will take go with training pants and a plastic bag with you if you get a pee by mistake take it out and wear another pant its ok child no problem we will wear another pant next time if mom gets a pee tell her mom will take you to toilet I can't tell her now tell her tell her in gestures No, he will tell me after he does it. Because I have kept it diaper free many times, but in pants, like in the pajamas of the house. So he tells me after doing it. That's wonderful. So it has to be done that way, after doing it every time he tells you, then only tell him. Oh, what, wait, mom changes pants, next time you feel, then only tell. Okay, okay. When this happens 18 to 20 times, then only the child will tell you once or twice in the whole day. and for that I have to keep it diaper free at home so first keep it for an hour, then two hours, then three hours then after that keep it for two hours I told her to sit on the floor like this and she did it once after doing it she got so excited now she does it in the empty space and she sees but nothing comes out then she sees if there is anything no no my dear we will have to train it accordingly she will have to keep it diaper free ok thank you Love you. Devangini, quickly ask me a question. The next ones are waiting for baby care. I will ask the question on WhatsApp group. I just wanted to say thank you. See I am very emotional now. But thank you so much. Thank you so much for every, every, everybody. Thank you so much Devangini. Tell me a simple thing. I always feel that it's a blessing to have you all who wants to learn from me. Happy Mother's Day to all of you. And happy Mother's Day to our little ones because they are gifted as motherhood. Motherhood is not easy parents. It comes with its own small challenges. And I think the beauty is you all came out of it very resiliently. See I happened to be one of the person who could cross and you are able to connect to me to implement. Some people connect to us and some don't. Somehow our vibes matched and that's why we are able to go ahead with lot of love and care. Thank you so much. Love you so much. Happy happy happy happy Mother's Day to all of you. please put your questions on the whatsapp group i'll ensure that i answer each and every question loving you all so much thank you same to you love you so much bye bye take care bye